==============================================================================
CHAPTER 14. PLUTO2: Non-Voided Channel Fuel Motion Analysis
source: https://sas-doc.nse.anl.gov/latest/Part04/Ch14/Ch14.html   (ANL/NSE-SAS/5.8.1)
scope: out of scope: PLUTO2 fuel motion, post-failure
==============================================================================
[anchor: pluto2-non-voided-channel-fuel-motion-analysis]

# 14. PLUTO2: Non-Voided Channel Fuel Motion Analysis

14.1. Introduction and Overview

14.1.1. Historical Background and Description of the Physical Model

14.1.2. Overview of the Program Flow

14.1.3. Interaction with other SAS4A Modules

14.2. In‑Pin Fuel Motion

14.2.1. Overview and Assumptions

14.2.2. Initial Conditions for the In‑pin Calculation from DEFORM and the Pre‑Failure Pin Heat‑transfer Calculation

14.2.3. Coupling of the In‑pin Motion Calculation with the PLHTR Heat Transfer Calculation

14.2.4. Overview of the Numerical Approach for the In‑pin Fuel Motion Calculation and Description of Subroutines PLlPIN and PL2PIN

14.2.5. Definition of the Generalized Smear Densities for the In‑pin Calculation

14.2.6. Differential Equations for the In-pin Fuel Motion and Description of Sink and Source Terms

14.2.7. Finite Difference Equations for the In-pin Motion

14.2.8. Time-step Determination for the In-Pin Motion

14.3. Fuel and Fission-gas Ejection from the Pins

14.3.1. Physical Model and Assumptions

14.3.2. Numerical Solution of the Fuel and Gas Ejection Calculation

14.3.3. Axial Pin Failure Propagation

14.3.4. Complete Pin Disruption and Switch to LEVITATE

14.4. Channel Hydrodynamics Model

14.4.1. Overview and Definition of Generalized Smear Densities

14.4.2. Mass Conservation for Fuel, Sodium, and Free and Dissolved Fission-gas

14.4.3. Fuel Flow Regimes, Fuel Plateout and Frozen Crust Release, Plated‑out and Moving Fuel Configurations, and Energy and Momentum Exchange Terms

14.4.4. Mobile Fuel and Fuel Crust Energy Equations

14.4.5. Sodium/Fission-gas Energy Equation and Channel Pressure Calculation

14.4.6. Momentum Equations in the Coolant Channel

14.5. Temperature Calculation of Cladding, Structure, Reflector, and Liquid Sodium

14.5.1. Liquid Sodium, Cladding, Structure, and Reflector Temperature Calculation Outside of the Interaction Region

14.5.2. Cladding and Reflector Temperature Calculation in the Interaction Region

14.5.3. Structure Temperature Calculation in the Interaction Region

14.6. Interaction with the Point Kinetics and the Primary Loop Module

14.6.1. Interaction With the Point Kinetics Module

14.6.2. Coupling with the Primary Loop Module

14.7. Code Logic Description

14.7.1. PLUTO2 Initialization

14.7.2. Time Step Considerations and Auxiliary Subroutines

14.8. Description of Input to and Output of the PLUTO2 Module

14.8.1. PLUTO2 Input

14.8.2. PLUTO2 Output

14.9. References

14.10. Nomenclature


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[page: Part04/Ch14/introduction.html]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[anchor: introduction-and-overview]

# 14.1. Introduction and Overview

[anchor: historical-background-and-description-of-the-physical-model]

## 14.1.1. Historical Background and Description of the Physical Model

The PLUTO2 module calculates the post‑failure fuel motion and sodium
voiding in subassemblies experiencing an overpower condition leading to
significant fuel melting, fuel‑pin failures and fuel ejection into
unvoided or partially voided coolant channels. The degree of fuel‑pin
disruption is limited to cladding ruptures through which molten fuel can
be ejected into the coolant channels. Thus, this model will be
appropriate for treating the early post‑pin‑failure phase of higher ramp
rate transient overpower (TOP) accidents and the entire post‑failure
phase of lower ramp rate TOPs if no complete pin disintegration or
extensive cladding melting occurs. Of additional importance is the
module’s application to the early post‑pin‑failure fuel motion and
sodium voiding in unvoided or partially voided subassemblies
experiencing a Loss‑of‑Flow driven TOP (LOF’d’TOP). Once complete pin
disintegration, high fuel vapor pressures, or molten cladding motion
have to be considered, a switch to the LEVITATE module, which is
designed to treat these phenomena, is made. This compatibility between
PLUTO2 and LEVITATE is important for a consistent continuation of the
analysis of the transient. This compatibility did not exist between the
corresponding SAS3D modules SAS/FCI [14‑1] and SLUMPY [14-2] which
could never be used sequentially to treat the same fuel pin.

The PLUTO2 module can be used in all situations for which the SAS/FCI
module of SAS3D was used. Moreover, the PLUTO2 fuel pins can fail into
partially voided coolant channels, which was not possible with SAS/FCI.
The models in PLUTO2 are considerably more mechanistic than those used
in SAS/FCI. For example, fuel motion in SAS/FCI was largely treated with
a lumped parameter approach, whereas PLUTO2 has one‑dimensional models
of the fuel motion inside the pins and in the coolant channels.
Moreover, PLUTO2 treats phenomena that were not addressed in SAS/FCI
such as continuous molten fuel flow regimes and the plateout of freezing
fuel.

The PLUTO2 module is an outgrowth of the earlier PLUTO code [14‑3, 14‑4]
which has been successfully used to simulate the early sodium voiding
and fuel motion in TOP experiments [14‑5, 14‑6]. Therefore, the basic
PLUTO concept has been retained in PLUTO2. However, as mentioned above,
PLUTO2 is also designed to analyze the longer‑term phenomena in mild
TOPs and the early phases of LOF’d’TOPs. Moreover, PLUTO2 has an
Eulerian hydrodynamic treatment which eliminates most of the cumbersome
rezoning that was necessary in the Lagrangian PLUTO code. The Eulerian
treatment has allowed the incorporation of axial cladding rupture
propagation, fuel plateout, and variable cross section flow.
Furthermore, PLUTO2 is considerably more economical to run than PLUTO;
this is of importance for a module of a whole‑core analysis code.

The PLUTO2 (and LEVITATE) coolant‑channel treatment considers the entire
subassembly cross section with all associated cladding and structure
although the treatment is still one‑dimensional. This is somewhat
different from the concept that is used in the pre‑fuel motion phase in
SAS4A. The latter considers the coolant flow area, cladding and
structure associated with only one pin.

Schematics of the PLUTO2 model when used for a mild TOP calculation and
for a LOF’d’TOP condition are shown in Figure 14.1.1 and Figure 14.1.2,
respectively. These schematics are for a single pin with a coolant
channel that can belong to one or more pins. Although the PLUTO2 channel
treatment is one‑dimensional (i.e., there is a common treatment of all
subchannels), not all of the fuel pins in a subassembly have to fail
simultaneously. A number of the pins, as specified by input, can remain
intact. A treatment of the delayed failure of these pins is not yet
operational. In cases that assume that only some of the pins in a
subassembly fail, the fuel and gas ejection from these failed pins will
be added to all coolant subchannels since all subchannels in a
subassembly are treated alike. This has prompted the use of the
above‑mentioned concept in PLUTO2 in which the basic channel cell has a
cross section equal to the entire coolant flow area in a subassembly.

The PLUTO2 model addresses three major modeling areas pertinent to the
post‑pin‑failure behavior. The first area is the in‑pin fuel motion
toward a cladding rupture, the second is the fuel and gas ejection
through the cladding rupture, and the third is the multi‑component,
multi‑phase hydrodynamics treatment in the coolant channel.

The basic assumption for the in‑pin motion is the treatment of the
molten fuel region inside the pin (see Figure 14.1.1 and Figure 14.1.2) as a
pressurized cavity containing fuel and fission gas, which flow toward a
cladding rupture. This general concept was already used in SAS/FCI,
PLUTO, and EPIC [14‑7, 14‑8]. The key PLUTO2 features in the modeling of
the in‑pin flow are:

A1) Treatment of the two‑phase, two‑component flow as a compressible
homogeneous flow with variable flow cross section and strong mass sinks
(due to fuel ejection) and mass sources (due to the addition of melting
fuel).

A2) Modeling of the radial and axial growth of the molten fuel cavity
due to additional fuel melt‑in determined by a heat‑transfer calculation
in the solid fuel annulus which is performed by subroutine PLHTR.

A3) The treatment of two types of fission‑gas bubbles in the molten
cavity. These are the large fission‑gas bubbles on the grain boundaries
which are assumed to act like free gas and exert pressure in the molten
cavity and very small intragranular bubbles which do not affect the
cavity pressure directly because they are assumed to be totally
constrained by surface tension. However, these small bubbles can
coalesce into large bubbles and thus contribute to the cavity
pressurization in a delayed fashion. In the code, the rate of
coalescence is controlled by an input time constant. Up to the time of
pin failure, when PLUTO2 is initiated, the relative fractions of these
two types of gas bubbles in the solid fuel and molten fuel cavity are
calculated by DEFORM. DEFORM has the same two‑bubble fission‑gas
treatment and uses the same input grain‑boundary gas fraction and time
constant for small bubble coalescence. Once PLUTO2 is active, additional
fuel can melt into the cavity which brings fission gas with it. The
total amount of fission gas in the melting fuel node is known from the
steady‑state DEFORM calculation. In the solid fuel, the DEFORM
calculation tracks grain boundary gas (large bubbles) and intragranular
gas (small bubbles) separately. The input fraction (FIFNGB) should
roughly correspond to the fraction of gas on the grain boundaries in the
solid fuel as determined from post‑irradiation examinations of fuel
pins.

A4) A simple fuel vapor pressure calculation which is based on the
radially averaged temperature in a cavity node is performed. The fuel
vapor pressure and the fission‑gas pressure are assumed to be additive.
A better fuel vapor pressure calculation would be based on the maximum
fuel temperature in a node. However, computing the latter in a moving
fluid is difficult. Also, it is not clear that any significant radial
temperature gradients remain present after the onset of fuel motion.
This problem will be addressed in future SAS4A work.

The fuel ejection from the pins is based on the assumption that the
cavity pressure in the node behind the cladding rupture of the failed
pins equilibrates instantaneously with the coolant channel pressure at
the same elevation by ejecting appropriate amounts of fuel and gas. The
latter are ejected with the same volume ratio as present in the cavity
nodes. If the pressure in the coolant channel becomes temporarily higher
than the pressure in the failed cavity nodes, the fuel and gas ejection
is halted. Backflow of fuel, gas or sodium into the pins is not allowed.
Two items concerning pin failure coherency and the axial pin‑failure
propagation are of importance:

B1) There is an option to fail only some of the pins in a subassembly.
The other pins remain intact. This option is relevant for mild TOPs.
Because of the common one‑dimensional treatment of all subchannels, this
requires that the failed pins are reasonably well distributed over the
subassembly cross section (see Figure 14.1.3). A problem with this option
is that LEVITATE cannot be switched on after PLUTO2 because LEVITATE
assumes that all pins in a subassembly are failed.

B2) The cladding failures can enlarge axially; this is also referred to
as axial pin‑failure propagation. There is a nonmechanistic pin‑failure
propagation option available which is keyed on input fuel melt fraction,
cladding temperature, and required pressure difference between cavity
and channel. The mechanistic option compares the calculated cladding
hoop stress with an ultimate tensile strength function. Moreover, an
input fuel melt fraction has also to be exceeded.

The axial pin‑failure propagation is of key importance for lower
power channels experiencing a high overpower condition due to an LOF
accident (LOF’d’TOP). In this case, the cladding can be relatively
soft along a considerable length of the channel at the time of the
initial failure. This may lead to rapid axial failure propagation.
For milder overpower conditions, the axial failure propagation would
be slower and mostly caused by the overheating of the cladding by
molten fuel that has been ejected into the coolant channels.

Figure 14.1.1 PLUTO2 Schematic for Transient Overpower Conditions

Figure 14.1.2 PLUTO2 Schematic for Loss of Flow Driven Transient Overpower Conditions

Figure 14.1.3 Illustration of Particulate Fuel Flow Regions (Upper Figure) and Partial Annular Fuel Flow Regime (Lower Figure) for a Seven-Pin Bundle in Which Only Four Pins Are Assumed to Have Failed

In the coolant channels, PLUTO2 treats the flow of materials as a
one-dimensional, compressible two‑fluid flow with variable flow cross
section. One component of this two‑fluid treatment is the mobile fuel
and the fission gas that is dissolved in the fuel. The other component
is the mixture of liquid sodium, sodium vapor, fuel vapor, and free
fission gas. The salient features of the channel modeling can be seen in
Figure 14.1.1 and Figure 14.1.2 and are briefly discussed below.

C1) Coolant channel boiling is modeled by treating a static sodium film
that is left behind by the expelled coolant slugs (see upper voided
region in Figure 14.1.1 and Figure 14.1.2). The sodium film can be entrained by
vapor streaming and by the action of fuel particles. Once the fuel flow
regime becomes continuous (see below), the sodium film is
instantaneously entrained as droplets in the gaseous phase. This sodium
film is of importance because it provides a significant sodium vapor
source and it cools the cladding surface for some time after sodium
voiding has occurred.

C2) The liquid sodium slugs above and below the interaction region
(which encompasses all the two‑phase sodium, fuel, and fission gas) are
treated as incompressible slugs with variable flow cross section.
However, during the first few milliseconds after failure, an acoustic
approximation is made to determine the slug interface velocities.

C3) Three different fuel flow regimes are treated in PLUTO2:
particulate, partially or fully annular, and bubbly. The flow regime
selection is mainly keyed to the liquid sodium fraction and to the
channel fuel volume fraction.

The fuel motion in TOP accidents has been traditionally modeled as a
particulate fuel suspension in a two‑phase sodium/fission‑gas mixture.
However, the breakup of fuel into droplets or particles is likely only
when the liquid sodium fraction is fairly high. From TREAT experiments,
it can be concluded that continuous molten fuel flow regimes exist in
voided regions. In PLUTO2, continuous fuel flow regimes are, therefore,
considered in addition to the particulate flow regime. The treatment of
a partially annular fuel flow regime is not a common approach but has
been prompted by the notion that a relatively small amount of molten
fuel in a voided channel will not cover the entire cladding and
structure perimeter, but will rather behave like a single or multiple
rivulet flow. For higher fuel fractions, a complete annular fuel flow
regime is assumed and for an even higher fuel volume fraction, a bubbly
fuel flow is modeled. Figure 14.1.3 illustrates the particulate and
partially annular flow regime models for a seven‑pin TREAT test bundle
for the case in which only a certain fraction of the pins has failed.
For the particulate or bubbly fuel flows, the fuel is simply uniformly
distributed in all subchannels. For the partially annular flow, the fuel
mass is assumed to be distributed between the pin cladding and structure
in proportion to the cladding‑to‑structure surface area ratio. The
cladding of all failed and unfailed pins is assumed to be covered by
equal amounts of fuel film with equal film thickness. The fraction of
the cladding perimeters covered by the fuel films is dependent on the
fuel volume fraction and the input constant CIANIN. Where this fuel is
exactly located on the pin perimeters is not relevant since there is no
azimuthal cladding temperature distribution calculated. The fraction of
the fuel covering the structure is of considerable importance in small
bundles. Once frozen fuel crusts are generated (see below), they are
also distributed in the same manner. Once the fuel fraction is high
enough to lead to a fully annular flow, all cladding and structure in a
given node is covered by the fuel films. The fuel flow regimes will be
discussed in more detail in Section 14.4.2. Figure 14.4.1, which is
shown later in Section 14.4, illustrates the fuel flow regimes in more
detail for an equivalent cylindrical geometry.

Modeling these different fuel flow regimes explicitly has the advan‑tage
that one has all interaction areas for heat, mass, and momentum transfer
readily available.

C4) Frozen fuel plateout is treated in PLUTO2 because there is
over‑whelming evidence from in‑pile and out‑of‑pile experiments that
fuel freezing and plateout are key phenomena. In PLUTO2, only fuel in
the continuous flow regime can plate out on cladding and structure upon
fuel freezing. The fuel particles are not allowed to stick to cladding
and structure because the fuel particles are assumed to have a solid
shell due to their interaction with liquid sodium.

The modeling of the fuel plateout in PLUTO2 can either be of the
bulk‑freezing type or conduction‑limited type. This is controlled by
input parameter CIFUFZ, which also allows intermediate modes. Frozen
fuel crusts can also become mobile after remelting. In addition,
frozen fuel crusts are released into the moving fuel stream if the
underlying clad or structure becomes significantly molten.

C5) The Fuel‑Coolant Interaction (FCI) treatment depends on the fuel
flow regime. In the particulate flow regime, the FCI treatment is
largely based on the Cho‑Wright approach [14‑9] which considers the heat
flow resistance in the fuel particles and ignores the resistance of
liquid sodium. Moreover, the resistance due to vapor blanketing is
treated in a parametric fashion in PLUTO2. In the code, separate FCI
calculations are done for every numerical cell, whereas the Cho‑Wright
model is a lumped‑parameter approach. Of importance for the FCI
treatment in PLUTO2 is also the treatment of the slip between fuel and
liquid sodium which mitigates the strength of the FCI’s.

In the annular fuel flow regimes in PLUTO2, the convective heat
transfer between the hot fuel film and/or fuel crusts and the
two‑phase sodium/fission‑gas mixture is considered. Since the fuel
surface area for the annular flow is significantly smaller than that
for the particulate flow, this type of FCI is much milder.

In the bubbly fuel flow regime high heat‑transfer rates between fuel
and liquid sodium are possible, but the bubbly fuel flow regime is
usually generated at an axial elevation where no liquid sodium is
present. The penetration of liquid sodium into a bubbly fuel flow
regime is also unlikely in the one‑dimensional PLUTO2 because the
cladding near a node with bubbly flow is usually too hot to allow
reentry of liquid sodium.

The numerical grids on which the hydrodynamics equations are solved are
shown in Figure 14.1.4. The stationary Eulerian grid in the molten pin
cavity is aligned with the stationary Eulerian grid in the coolant
channel. The cavity grid can expand continuously in the radial direction
due to fuel melt‑in and stepwise (by whole cells) in the axial
direction. The grid on which the reactivity calculations are done
covers the pin and blankets and the adjacent coolant channel cells from
K = 1 to K = MZ. Outside the molten cavity region, this grid is also
subdivided radially for the heat‑transfer calculation in the solid fuel
and cladding. The interaction region in the coolant channel can expand
or contract continuously in the axial direction, which requires a
partially Lagrangian treatment for the edge cells of the interaction
region. The channel fuel region and the fission‑gas region also expand
or contract continuously in the axial direction. However, when they have
moved into a new cell, the fuel or fission gas is assumed to be
homogeneously distributed in that cell for calculating the pressure,
heat transfer, momentum change, and reactivity. On the mesh grids above
and below the interaction region, only the liquid sodium temperatures
are calculated. The momentum change of the liquid sodium slugs is
calculated in an integral fashion.

The current status of the PLUTO2 validation and its future validation
needs are discussed in the SAS4A Validation and Verification Plan
[14‑10]. Here only an enumeration of the integral validation efforts
already performed will be given. As mentioned earlier, the PLUTO code
has been successfully used to simulate the early sodium voiding and fuel
motion in two in‑pile TOP experiments [14‑5, 14‑6]. PLUTO2 comparison
calculations with PLUTO showed good agreement for the early fuel motion
and sodium voiding [14‑11]. An intercode comparison with the EPIC code
for LOF’d’TOP conditions showed that the two codes compare rather well
when several of the advanced features in PLUTO2, such as fuel flow
regimes and fuel plateout, are switched off [14‑12]. PLUTO2 was also
used in the EEC‑WAC TOP comparative exercise [14‑20]. Because its
advanced features were active in this comparison exercise, the PLUTO2
results differed considerably from those calculated with simpler models.

A reasonably good post‑test simulation of the major flow event in the H6
50 ¢/s TOP TREAT test [14‑13] was achieved through input parameter
adjustments [14‑6]. However, some uncertainty with regard to the mode of
the FCI observed in this test could not be resolved. A good post‑test
simulation of the L8 LOF’d’TOP TREAT Test [14‑14, 14‑15, 14‑12] was also
achieved after introduction of a model for frozen fuel crust release
from molten cladding. This was prompted by a pre‑test analysis which
underpredicted the fuel dispersal [14-16]. Other pretest predictions
with PLUTO2 were made for the AX1 $3/s TOP test using carbide fuel
[14‑17], the W2 10 ¢/s TOP test in the ETR [14‑18], and the 37‑pin
bundle P4 pin‑failure propagation test in ETR [14‑19]. The prediction
for the AX1 test was quite reasonable, whereas the prediction for W2
suffered from the assumption of too coherent pin failures. The PLUTO2 P4
pretest analysis predicted a complete sweepout of the fuel ejected from
the three fuel canisters used in this test, whereas the experiment led
to very little sweepout and a sizable frozen fuel blockage. Possible
explanations of the observed behavior include sodium bypass effects in a
large bundle or the fuel canister ejecting the fuel more violently than
the fuel pins in TOP tests.

Figure 14.1.4 Axial Mesh Cells Used in the Pin and the Coolant Channel for the Numerical Solution of Conservation Equations. Also Shown Are the Different Component Regions in the Channel

[anchor: overview-of-the-program-flow]

## 14.1.2. Overview of the Program Flow

Either PLUTO2 or LEVITATE is initiated once the subroutine FAILUR has
predicted pin failure and a minimum fuel melt fraction equal to the
input parameter FMELTM exists at the failure node. Subroutine FAILUR is
usually called from the driver of the DEFORM pin‑behavior module.
However, in the case when cladding motion has already begun, it is
directly called from the transient SAS4A driver routine TSTHRM. The
decision as to which one of the two modules, PLUTO2 or LEVITATE, is to
be initiated depends on the existence and size of a boiling region at
the time of pin failure and whether the pins are predicted to fail into
a voided or unvoided region of the coolant channel. If there is no
boiling, as in an intermediate ramp rate TOP accident or if the pins
fail into the liquid region of a partially voided channel, PLUTO2 will
be initiated because of its capability of treating FCI’s and sweepout of
particulate fuel. For the case of fuel failing into a multibubble
boiling region, PLUTO2 will only be initiated if the average void
fraction in this region is less than 70%. If the average void fraction
is larger or if cladding motion has begun, LEVITATE will be initiated.

The PLUTO2 initialization is described in more detail in Section 14.7.1.
The subroutines involved in this procedure are PLINPT, PLSET, PLSETl,
and PLSAIN. In these routines all permanent PLUTO2 variables are either
set to input values or values calculated by the single‑phase hydraulics,
the pin heat‑transfer routines, the pin behavior module DEFORM, or the
boiling module. It should also be mentioned here that the flag ICALC,
which designates which major module is currently active, will be set to
3 if PLUTO2 has been initialized and to 2 if LEVITATE has been
initialized.

Once the PLUTO2 initialization routines have been executed and the flag
ICALC has been set to 3, the transient SAS4A driver TSTHRM (see flow
diagram in Chapter 2) will call PLUDRV (PLUTO2 DRIVER
SUBROUTINE). PLUDRV will retain control and advance the solution using
PLUTO2 time steps until the end of the primary‑loop time step is
reached. If another SAS4A channel is using PLUTO2 at this time, its
solution will also be advanced until the end of the current primary‑loop
time step.

The flowcharts in Figure 14.1.5 and Figure 14.1.6 show the logic of the PLUTO2
driver. They are complete except for an option for switching off all
subroutines performing the material velocity calculations. This option
is discussed later in this section. If the flag MODEPL, which controls
this option, is zero, the flow diagrams in Figure 14.1.5 and Figure 14.1.6 are
appropriate.

If the flag ILEPLI has been set to 1 in the PLUTO2 initialization (see
Figure 14.7.2 in Section 14.7), LEVITATE will have to be initiated via
PLUTO2. In this case, the PLUTO2 driver calls LEPLIN which is the
interface routine between PLUTO2 and LEVITATE. The flag ICALC is then
set to 2 and control is returned to TSTHRM. The latter will call the
LEVITATE driver at the beginning of the next coolant time step upon
encountering ICALC = 2 for the channel under consideration (see flow
diagram of TSTHRM in Chapter 2).

If ILEPLI is not equal to 1, subroutine PLSET2 will be called (see Figure 14.1.5). In this subroutine, all temporary arrays (i.e., arrays which
can be overwritten once control is returned to TSTHRM) are initiated.
Moreover, temporary integers are set.

Figure 14.1.5 First Part of the Flow Chart of the PLUTO2 Driver Subroutine, PLUDRV, Showing the Functions of the Major Subroutines

Figure 14.1.6 Second Part of the Flow Chart of the PLUTO2 Driver Subroutine, PLUDRV, Showing the Functions of the Major Subroutines

Next, the PLUTO2 time is advanced by adding the PLUTO2 time‑step size to
the time at the beginning of the PLUTO2 cycle. The time‑step increment
for the very first PLUTO2 cycle is an input value which is also the
minimum PLUTO2 time‑step size. Later, in the logic flow, the time‑step
size is calculated.

Next, the inlet and outlet pressures at the end of the PLUTO2 time step
are determined from the PRIMAR calculated inlet and outlet pressures and
rates of inlet and outlet pressure changes.

Next, the power level at the end of the PLUTO2 time step is calculated
from an exponential fit of the power‑time history that takes the power
level at the beginning of the previous and the current main time steps
and the precalculated power level at the end of the current main time
step into account. By using the calculated power level and the axial
input power distribution, the specific power for each axial pin node is
calculated. The same specific power is set for the corresponding channel
nodes.

In subroutine PSHAPE, which is not a PLUTO2 subroutine, the total power
for all axial fuel‑pin nodes is calculated assuming that the pin is
still intact. This is needed for the heat‑transfer calculation in the
solid fuel annulus in the pin.

Next, cladding and structure temperatures in the nodes adjacent to the
interaction region are initialized in order to make sure that they will
be available if the interaction zone expands into one of these nodes.

In subroutine PLIF (PLUTO2 INTERFACES), the axial
displacements of the sodium slug interfaces, the interfaces of the
fission‑gas region and the interfaces of the regions containing fuel
are reset. The actual calculations of the velocities needed for this
resetting are performed later in subroutine PLMOCO. The initial sodium
velocities come from the single‑phase hydraulics or the boiling model
and are set in PLSAIN. Fission gas and mobile sodium velocities are
always the same in PLUTO2. Subroutine PLIF also calculates the axial
pin‑failure propagation and resets the pointer array IDISR(I) which
indicates which pin nodes have failed.

In subroutine PLREZO (PLUTO2 REZONE), mesh cells are added to an
expanding interaction region or deleted from a shrinking interaction
region. Moreover, it cuts off short columns of liquid sodium slugs
which are attempting to reenter into a cell of the interaction zone
containing frozen fuel or ruptured cladding. The liquid sodium is added
homogeneously to such cells. If fuel pins fail into the lower sodium
slug, PLREZO will enlarge the interaction region downwards.

In subroutine PLFREZ (PLUTO2 FREEZING ROUTINE), the amount
of fuel plating out per time step and per node is calculated. Moreover,
PLFREZ calculates the amount of crust released because of remelting or
because the underlying cladding has become molten. The released fuel
crusts, which have an axial velocity of zero, are mixed with the moving
fuel and an updated velocity is calculated by momentum averaging.

In PLMACO (PLUTO2 MASS CONSERVATION), the mass conservation
equations for the moving components in the channels are solved. This
includes a combined mass conservation for solid or liquid fuel and fuel
vapor, and mass conservations for the sodium, free fission gas and
dissolved fission gas. There is a special treatment for the top and
bottom cells of the channel. Fuel, sodium and fission‑gas will be taken
out and stored in a reservoir if the interaction region has extended
into the lowermost or uppermost channel cell.

In subroutine PLVOFR (PLUTO2 VOLUME FRACTIONS), the
entrainment of the static sodium film by the flow of the two‑phase
sodium/fission‑gas mixture and of the fuel particles as well as the
de‑entrainment of liquid droplets onto the film, is calculated. PLVOFR
also sets the volume fractions of the various components based on the
results of the plateout and crust release calculation in PLFREZ and the
results of the mass conservation equations. The final section of
subroutine PLVOFR is devoted to the selection of the fuel flow regime.

In subroutine PLMISC (PLUTO2 MISCELLANEOUS), several important
items are calculated. First, the molten‑ and frozen‑fuel configurations
in the flow channel are determined (see Figure 14.4.1). Second, most
energy and some momentum exchange terms between the various flow
components, cladding and structure are calculated. Because many of these
interaction terms depend on the fuel flow regimes, three different
exchange coefficients are needed for several of the components. Third,
the mobile fuel energy equation is solved.

In subroutine PLTECS (PLUTO2 TEMPERATURE CALCULATION OF
CLADDING AND STRUCTURE}, the cladding, reflector, and structure
temperatures within the interaction zone are calculated. This
calculation is preceded by the determination of the energy exchange
coefficients for the frozen fuel crust and the solution of the frozen
crust energy equation. Since the energy exchange between fuel crust and
moving fuel was not considered in subroutine PLMISC, an updating of the
moving fuel energies is also performed here.

In subroutine PLNAEN (PLUTO2 NA ENERGY EQUATION), the
two‑phase and single‑phase enthalpy equations for the mixture of sodium
and fission gas are solved. From the resulting temperatures and the
previously calculated volume fractions (see PLVOFR), the liquid‑phase
sodium pressure or the sodium saturation or superheated sodium vapor
pressure, as well as the free fission gas pressure, are calculated. In
addition, the total end‑of‑time‑step pressure, which includes the fuel
vapor pressure, is calculated.

In subroutine PLlPIN (PLUTO2 NO.1 PIN EQUATIONS}, the mass and
energy equations for the in‑pin fuel motion are solved. At first, the
fuel and free and dissolved fission‑gas mass sources due to fuel melt‑in
are calculated and the in‑pin cavity enlargement is determined.
Moreover, the free fission‑gas mass sources due to dissolved gas
coalescence and the corresponding sinks for the dissolved gas are
evaluated. Following these, the fuel mass and energy conservation
equations and the free fission‑gas mass conservation equation are
solved. Then, a preliminary end‑of‑time‑step pressure is calculated for
all cavity cells. This pressure calculation takes the prior‑calculated
end‑of-time‑step densities and temperatures into account. Only the
pressures in the ejecting nodes will be further updated; in the other
cells, the “preliminary end‑of‑time‑step pressure” is the pressure that
will actually be used in the momentum equation. The last major item in
PLlPIN is the calculation of the mass of fuel and fission gas ejected
from all cavity cells that have failed cladding and a pressure higher
than that in the corresponding channel cell. The masses of fuel and free
and dissolved fission gases in these cavity cells are then reduced and
the pressure is updated. The fuel and free and dissolved fission‑gas
masses in the channel cells are correspondingly increased and the
end‑of‑time‑step pressures in the channel nodes receiving fuel and/or
fission gas are updated. The fuel energy in the channel nodes receiving
fuel is also updated due to the addition of fuel with a higher
temperature.

In subroutine PL2PIN (PLUTO2 NO. 2 PIN EQUATIONS), the momentum
equation for the homogeneous fuel/fission gas mixture in the molten pin
cavity is solved. Next, the mass conservation equation for the dissolved
fission gas is solved. This could have been solved earlier in PLlPIN but
that routine had become too crowded. The calculation of the time‑step
size for the in‑pin calculation during the next time step is also
performed in PL2PIN.

In subroutine PLMOCO (PLUTO2 MOMENTUM CONSERVATION), many
quantities which were previously needed only at the cell centers have to
be defined at the cell edges. Moreover, most of the momentum exchange
terms and, in particular, the drag between the fuel and the two‑phase
sodium/fission‑gas mixture are evaluated for the particulate and bubbly
fuel flow regimes. The main section of this routine deals with the
simultaneous solution of the two momentum equations at all cell edges
in the interaction region. Moreover, momentum equations will also be
solved for fuel particles at either end of the fuel region if the end
nodes of the fuel region are in a particulate flow regime. Another
section of PLMOCO deals with the calculation of the interaction zone
interface velocities. This includes an acoustic approach in the liquid
slugs during the first few milliseconds after pin failure and later an
incompressible variable‑cross‑section treatment of the upper and lower
coolant slugs. Also calculated in PLMOCO are instantaneous coolant slug
flow rates for the entire calculational channel, as well as the
integrated channel flow rates over a PRIMAR time step. These quantities
are needed by the PRIMAR4 module for recalculating the inlet and outlet
pressures.

The next task in the PLUTO2 driver routine is the time‑step size
determination in the coolant channel. This is compared with the
time‑step size calculated for the in‑pin motion and the smaller of the
two will be the PLUTO2 time‑step size for the next calculational step.

The next task of PLUDRV is to calculate the transient mass distributions
for the fuel and voiding reactivities. This calculation will be
described in the next section on the interaction with other SAS4A
modules.

If the time at the end of a PLUTO2 time step coincides with the end of
the heat‑transfer time step, several heat‑transfer routines are called.
This “coincidence” is forced to occur whenever the calculated PLUTO2
time step would overshoot the end of the heat‑transfer time step. In
this case, the PLUTO2 time step is set to coincide with the end of the
heat‑transfer time step. This is actually done right after the time‑step
size calculation described above.

The heat‑transfer time step is determined next. Its maximum value is
based on a characteristic heat‑transfer time of the cladding and can be
further limited by small primary‑loop time steps which will be small in
high power situations because the main (or point kinetics) time step
becomes small. Since the heat‑transfer time step is also used for the
liquid slug temperature calculations, it can be further limited by a
Courant condition based on the slug velocities.

In subroutine PLCOOL (PLUTO2 COOLANT SLUG TEMPERATURE), the
temperature in all numerical nodes in the liquid sodium slugs is
calculated. This involves the calculation of heat‑transfer exchange
terms between liquid sodium and cladding, plenum cladding, reflectors,
and structure, and the solution of an energy equation. Moreover, PLCOOL
checks whether a node in the lower sodium slug has started to boil.

In subroutine PLSTR (PLUTO2 STRUCTURE TEMPERATURE CALCULATION),
the temperatures of the structure, the plenum cladding, and the
reflectors outside of the interaction region are calculated.

In subroutine PLHTR (PLUTO2 HEAT TRANSFER), calculations are
made of the temperature fields in the solid fuel annulus surrounding the
molten fuel cavity, in the unmelted fuel and blanket cells, and in the
fuel and blanket cladding outside the interaction region. The
heat‑transfer boundary condition at the interface between the molten
cavity and the solid fuel annulus is treated by applying a
time‑integrated heat flow rate term whose contributions were calculated
and summed up in subroutine PLlPIN. The boundary condition between the
inner cladding and the outer fuel surface is also based on such an
integrated heat flow rate term. The latter is calculated and summed up
in subroutine PLTECS, in which the cladding temperature field in the
interaction region is calculated using the PLUTO2 time step.

If it is time to produce output, subroutine PLOUT (PLUTO2
OUTPUT) will be called. If the end of the PRIMAR time step has not
yet been reached, the logic flow will return to point B (see Figure 14.1.5).

If the end of the PLUTO2 time step coincides with the end of the
primary loop time step, a check is made whether the conditions require
a switch to the LEVITATE module. This will be necessary if extensive
cladding melting has occurred or if complete fuel‑pin disruption is
imminent or if the fuel vapor pressures have become quite high. In this
case, the LEVITATE‑PLUTO2 interface routine LEPLIN is called and the
integer flag ICALC is set to 2 which will assure the calling of the
LEVITATE driver routine LEVDRV at the beginning of the next PRIMAR step.
Whether a switch to LEVITATE is made or not, control will now be
returned to the transient driver TSTHRM.

An option, which is not shown in the flow charts in Figure 14.1.5 and
14.1‑6, allows the user to set all material velocities to small values
and to shut off all the subroutines or subroutine sections that are
calculating the motion of materials in PLUTO2. This option, which allows
an economical but very simplistic continuation of a PLUTO2 calculation
for several tens of seconds, is useful for the later treatment of a lead
channel failing long before other channels in a low‑ramp‑rate TOP
calculation. This situation is most likely to occur when the negative
reactivity introduced due to fuel sweepout from the lead channel is not
enough to insure permanent subcriticality. This option may be
reasonable for subassemblies that are completely blocked by frozen fuel
as long as they do not lose much heat to neighboring subassemblies (this
subassembly‑to‑subassembly heat loss should eventually be modeled in
SAS4A). Moreover, if the fuel in the disrupted assembly heats up too
much, it could also become mobile again; this is not currently treated.
The above‑mentioned PLUTO2 option will be activated if the input time
TIPLMX is exceeded by the PLUTO2 time.

[anchor: interaction-with-other-sas4a-modules]

## 14.1.3. Interaction with other SAS4A Modules

During the PLUTO2 initialization, data from several other modules are
transferred to PLUTO2 (see Figure 14.1.7). When PLUTO2 is used for a TOP
calculation, it requires data from the single‑phase hydraulics, the
DEFORM pin behavior module, and the pin heat‑transfer module for
non‑boiling conditions (whose driver routine is TSHTRN). When PLUTO2 is
used in a SAS4A channel experiencing a LOF’d’TOP condition, data may
also be needed from the boiling module and the heat‑transfer module for
boiling conditions (whose driver routine is TSHTRV). The PLUTO2
initialization has already been briefly discussed at the beginning of
Section 14.1.2 and will be described in more detail in Section 14.7.1.

Once PLUTO2 is active, there will only be an interaction with the point
kinetics module and also with the primary loop module if the PRIMAR‑4
module has been selected (see Figure 14.1.7). Moreover, there is an
interaction with the PLHTR pin heat‑transfer calculation which is
virtually a PLUTO2 routine but uses a different time step than PLUTO2
(see Section 14.1.2). There is no interaction with other modules because
PLUTO2 calculates the motion of the liquid sodium slugs (in PLMOCO), has
the capability to treat sodium boiling in regions which are not yet
occupied by fuel, and also has a simplified calculation of the axial
cladding failure propagation (in PLIF).

When PLUTO2 is active, it uses the user input axial fission power
distribution with the magnitude calculated by the point kinetics
module. PLUTO2 provides the point kinetics module with the sodium and
fuel axial mass distributions for all channels in which PLUTO2 is
active. Moreover, the Doppler reactivity calculation is based on PLUTO2
calculated average fuel temperatures. The details of these calculations
are given in Section 14.6.1.

If the PRIMAR-1 option is chosen PLUTO2 will use a constant outlet
coolant plenum pressure which is input and an inlet coolant plenum
pressure which is calculated by PRIMAR-1 at the beginning of the
transient and later modified by an input table PLUTO2 will not feed back
and information to the primary-loop module if the PRIMAR‑1 option has
been chosen.

Figure 14.1.7 Data Transfer Between the PLUTO2 Module and the Other SAS4A Module

If the PRIMAR‑4 option has been chosen, PLUTO2 uses the time‑dependent
inlet and outlet plenum pressures and temperatures which are calculated
by PRIMAR‑4. PLUTO2 feeds back to the PRIMAR‑4 module the sodium masses
ejected into or received from the inlet and outlet plena during a PRIMAR
time step. PLUTO2 also provides the PRIMAR-4 module with the energy of
the sodium ejected into the plena and with the liquid sodium flowrates
at the end of the PRIMAR time step. This is described in more detail in
Section 14.6.2.

The PLUTO2 calculation will be taken over by the LEVITATE module if
extensive cladding melting has occurred or if complete pin disruption
is imminent or if the fuel vapor pressure becomes quite high. This
transition, which can be controlled by input, is necessary because
PLUTO2 is not designed to treat these situations. However, the
transition to LEVITATE will not occur if only some of the pins have
failed in PLUTO2. This PLUTO2 option, which is useful for mild TOP
conditions, causes problems for LEVITATE because the latter assumes that
all pins have failed when it is initiated.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[page: Part04/Ch14/in-pin-motion.html]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[anchor: inpin-fuel-motion]

# 14.2. In‑Pin Fuel Motion

[anchor: overview-and-assumptions]

## 14.2.1. Overview and Assumptions

When LMFBR fuel pins melt in an overpower accident, the interiors of the
pins melt first and form cavities containing molten fuel and fission
gas. Some of this fission gas is dissolved in the molten fuel and the
remainder is free fission gas which resides in bubbles too large to be
constrained by surface tension. The decrease in the void volume, caused
by the density decrease of the melting fuel and also of the molten fuel,
which is further heated, compresses the free fission gas and causes a
hydrostatic cavity pressurization which loads the cladding. This cavity
pressure increases further when more free gas becomes available due to
additional fuel melting and release of dissolved gas, and when fuel
vaporization occurs. This leads eventually to cladding failure. The
subsequent fuel and fission‑gas ejection from the fuel pin and the local
depressurization in the cavity caused by this ejection leads to fuel
motion inside the pin toward the failure location. If the pin failure
location for driver fuel is above the core midplane, this in‑pin fuel
motion reduces reactivity; if it is near the midplane, it can cause a
reactivity addition.

The concept of a pressurized molten pin cavity, which was originally
developed for TOP accidents, is also reasonable for LOF accidents which
lead to a power rise and fuel melting before the cladding melts.
Therefore, this cavity concept is used not only in PLUTO2 but also in
LEVITATE. However, in an LOF accident, leading only to a few times
nominal power or less, cladding motion and fuel swelling will precede
fuel melting. In this case, the fuel pin is likely to disrupt completely
into a mixture of molten fuel, gas, and solid fuel chunks once fuel
melting has begun. This is only modeled in LEVITATE.

The in‑pin fuel motion in the molten pin cavity in both PLUTO2 and
LEVITATE is treated as a one‑dimensional, compressible flow with a time
dependent and spatially variable flow cross section. The fuel/fission
gas flow is considered to be homogeneous and the fission gas is assumed
to be in thermal equilibrium with the fuel.

Special attention had to be given to the potentially large mass sinks
due to fuel and fission‑gas ejection from the molten pin cavity. Mass
sources due to fuel melt‑in which cause flow cross section changes are
also considered. The fuel which is melting into the cavity brings with
it dissolved (intragranular) and free (intergranular) gas. These two
types of gas are treated separately in the PLUTO2 and LEVITATE in‑pin
motion models. The free gas is considered not to be constrained by
surface tension and to act as an ideal gas that is at the local fuel
temperature. The dissolved gas, which is in the form of small bubbles,
is assumed to be strongly constrained by surface tension, and its
contribution to the local pressure depends on the input variable PRSFTN.
If PRSFTN ≤ 107 then the model assumes that the volume of the
small bubbles containing the dissolved gas is negligible and thus the
dissolved gas does not immediately affect the local pressure. If PRSFTN
>107, the pressure calculation takes into account the volume of
the dissolved gas bubbles, as described in Section 14.2.6. The dissolved
gas is released (coalesces) according to a decay type law using an input
decay constant. The amount released during each time step is added to
the free gas. The fission-gas pressure calculation takes the
compressibility of the liquid fuel into account and reduces to a
liquid‑fuel single‑phase pressure calculation for no fission gas and
zero void volume. The total pressure includes the fission‑gas pressure
and fuel vapor pressure. The fuel vapor pressure is based on the
radially averaged fuel temperature.

Incoherency of the pin failures is mainly an issue in lower ramp rate
TOP accidents. In these accidents, pin failure incoherency should be
helpful for the post‑accident coolability. If not all pins fail in the
lead assemblies during a slow TOP, some subchannels may remain open and
provide coolant paths. However, if near‑midplane failures are assumed in
slow TOPs in higher void worth cores, there may be a potential for
exacerbating the accident due to pin failure incoherency. This is
because the first pin failures will probably lead to some rapid fuel
sweepout but may also cause significant voiding. Pins failing later will
inject fuel into partially voided regions and this fuel may not
experience rapid sweepout.

There are two major reasons for the incoherency in pin failures. One is
the stochastic nature of pin failures and the other is due to
differences in the power, flow, or coolant temperatures experienced by
different pins. For example, the outer two fuel‑pin rows in a
subassembly see colder coolant temperatures due to the proximity of the
hexcan wall. Many subassemblies in an LMFBR also see considerable radial
power skews. In PLUTO2 an attempt has been made to treat the stochastic
pin failures by allowing different pin failure groups. However,
currently only one pin group can fail, and the other two groups of pins
have to remain unfailed; (see input variables NRPIl, NRPI2, and NRPI3).
The treatment of the delayed fuel expulsion and in‑pin fuel motion for
the two additional pin groups is not yet operational.

[anchor: initial-conditions-for-the-inpin-calculation-from-deform-and-the-prefailure-pin-heattransfer-calculation]

## 14.2.2. Initial Conditions for the In‑pin Calculation from DEFORM and the Pre‑Failure Pin Heat‑transfer Calculation

Before pin failure, the molten fuel/fission‑gas cavity is treated by the
DEFORM pin behavior module. In the DEFORM treatment, the initially
present central fuel hole is considered and the closing of this central
hole due to the expansion of the molten fuel is calculated. Although
DEFORM does not calculate axial fuel redistribution inside the molten
cavity, an axially uniform pressure is assumed for the entire molten
cavity and found by considering the total gas and volume available. (An
option is also available in DEFORM to use the nodal pressures for
loading the cladding. This option is relevant only for very high power
situations in which the molten cavity grows to a large size within a few
milliseconds.) When pin failure is predicted by DEFORM or because an
input melt‑fraction or failure time have been reached, PLUTO2 is
initialized from DEFORM conditions. These include the uniform cavity
pressure (or the axial pressure distribution if the special DEFORM
option was used), the dissolved and free fission‑gas densities, and the
molten cavity geometry. However, PLUTO2 will have exactly the same
cavity geometry as DEFORM only if the PLUTO2 input option FNMELT = 0.0
is chosen. This value means that the radial cavity boundary is defined
by the location of the fuel solidus temperature (an assumption in
DEFORM). However, it is recommended for PLUTO2 to use a higher melt
fraction (FNMELT > 0.5) for the definition of the location of the
cavity boundary. This is because the analysis of TREAT test E8 [14‑5,
14‑6] showed that fuel, which had not yet undergone significant melting,
did not move. This can probably be explained by a high viscosity of
partially molten fuel.

When the regular DEFORM option of a uniform cavity pressure is used,
there is an inconsistency in the DEFORM/PLUTO2 transition due to the
lack of an axial in‑pin fuel motion model in DEFORM. The nodal pressures
calculated in PLUTO2 which use the pressure‑generating free fission gas
and the nodal volume obtained from DEFORM can be different from the
average cavity pressure. Since the latter is considered more realistic
for all but very high power situations, the free fission‑gas content of
the PLUTO2 nodes is adjusted to give the DEFORM calculated average
cavity pressure. When the axially nonuniform pressure option in DEFORM
is chosen (only relevant for very high power situations), the
PLUTO2‑calculated nodal pressure can still be somewhat different from
the one calculated by DEFORM and has to be slightly adjusted. This is
because DEFORM takes into account the radial temperature, fuel density,
and porosity profiles in the molten fuel cavity, whereas PLUTO2 uses a
radially averaged temperature, fuel density and porosity in the cavity
nodes. The above‑mentioned inconsistencies in the transition from DEFORM
to PLUTO2 are not considered to be serious. To remove them would require
the inclusion of pre‑failure in‑pin fuel motion in DEFORM and the
accounting of the radial temperature profile in the molten cavity in
PLUTO2 or LEVITATE.

The initialization of the PLUTO2 and LEVITATE cavity is done in
subroutines PLINPT (PL UTO2 INPUT) and PLSET (PLUTO2
SETUP). DEFORM calculated cavity dimensions and free and dissolved
fission‑gas densities are transferred to PLUTO2 in these routines. Also,
the radially averaged cavity temperatures are determined from the
temperature profiles obtained from the heat‑transfer routines, TSHTRN or
TSHTRV.

[anchor: coupling-of-the-inpin-motion-calculation-with-the-plhtr-heat-transfer-calculation]

## 14.2.3. Coupling of the In‑pin Motion Calculation with the PLHTR Heat Transfer Calculation

For the calculation of the growth of the molten fuel cavity, it is
important that a fuel temperature calculation is performed in the solid
fuel surrounding the molten fuel cavity. This temperature calculation is
performed with the PLHTR (PLUTO2 HEAT TRANSFER) routine which is a
modified version of the transient heat‑transfer subroutine TSHTRV. (The
latter is used to calculate fuel‑pin temperatures during the sodium
boiling phase of a LOF accident). In the PLHTR heat conduction
calculation, the fuel node adjacent to the molten cavity boundary
receives heat from the molten cavity in the form of a heat source. This
heat source is the total energy convected to the cavity wall from the
molten fuel flow during a heat‑transfer time step divided by the
heat‑transfer time‑step size. If a solid fuel node reaches the input
melt fraction criterion FNMELT, this node will be gradually added to the
molten cavity. The rate of fuel addition depends on the temperature
gradient between the node adjacent to the cavity wall and its
neighboring solid fuel node.

[anchor: overview-of-the-numerical-approach-for-the-inpin-fuel-motion-calculation-and-description-of-subroutines-pllpin-and-pl2pin]

## 14.2.4. Overview of the Numerical Approach for the In‑pin Fuel Motion Calculation and Description of Subroutines PLlPIN and PL2PIN

There are several requirements for the solution algorithm for this one
dimensional, compressible flow problem with variable flow cross
section: (a) it had to be able to handle large mass sinks (due to fuel
ejection from the pins), (b) it had to conserve mass perfectly, and (c)
it had to run efficiently. This was achieved with a predominantly
explicit Eulerian solution method. All convection mass, energy, and
momentum fluxes are treated explicitly (i.e., the beginning of
time‑step values are used). However, the solution sequence of the
different equations introduces a certain implicitness which is of
importance for treating the strong mass sinks.

For the in‑pin motion calculation three mass, one energy and one
momentum conservation equations are solved. The mass conservation
equations are for the fuel and the free and the dissolved fission gas.
The fuel and free fission‑gas mass conservation equations are solved
first, followed by the fuel energy conservation equation. The
fission‑gas temperature change is assumed to be the same as the fuel
temperature change. From the results of the mass and energy conservation
equations, a new pressure is calculated. This is not the true
end‑of‑time‑step pressure because the velocity changes during the time
step have not been included. However, it is a proper prediction for the
end‑of‑time‑ step value in an explicit sense. In the fuel‑ejecting
nodes, this new pressure and the advanced densities and energies are
used for calculating the fuel and fission‑gas ejection rates. The
pressure in the ejection nodes is then decreased in order to account for
the fuel and gas losses. The adjusted new pressures are then used in the
fuel/fission‑gas momentum equation. There is an input option in PLUTO2
to use a combination of the new and the old pressures. This option lets
the pressure, $P$ , be:

$$P = \left( 1 - \text{EPCH} \right) \cdot \text{beginning-of-time-step pressure} + \text{EPCH} \cdot \text{advanced pressure}$$ [eq 14.2-1]

The recommended input value is $\text{EPCH} = 1$ because the calculation
remained stable for longer time steps in test problems involving shock
propagation and shock reflection when this input value was used [14‑21].
In these test calculations, it was also attempted to iterate on the
convective fluxes by repeating most of the in‑pin calculation for each
time step. This seemed to make the results somewhat smoother, but did
not allow a time step as long as the one allowable with the
above‑described explicit scheme.

The time‑step criterion in this compressible calculation is the sonic
Courant condition. This does not require particularly small time steps
because the sonic velocity in two‑phase mixtures is fairly low for the
void fractions encountered in pin blowdown calculations.

A staggered numerical grid with the densities, energies, and
temperatures defined at the cell centers and the velocities at the cell
edges is used. The spatial differencing uses full donor cell
differencing. Although this is not as accurate as higher order
differencing, it makes the calculation stable because it introduces a
numerical diffusion effect. It is interesting to note that this
stabilizing effect was not enough to keep two‑phase test calculations
stable for shock reflections from a rigid wall. Although these test
calculations could be stabilized by introducing an artificial viscous
pressure into the calculations [14‑21], the artificial viscous pressure
is not necessary for regular pin blowdown calculations. It could even
cause problems if the input constants, which affect the magnitude of the
artificial viscous pressure, are set too high. The two relevant input
parameters, ClVIPR and C2VIPR, should therefore be set to small
values such as $10^{-3}$ .

The free fission‑gas mass conservation, the fuel mass conservation, and
the fuel energy equation are solved in subroutine PLlPIN (PLUTO2
1st PIN ROUTINE). PLlPIN also computes the molten cavity geometry
changes due to fuel melt‑in, and the fuel and fission‑gas ejection from
the pins (see Section 14.3). The fuel/fission‑gas momentum equation and
the dissolved fission‑gas mass equation are solved in PL2PIN (PLUTO2
2nd PIN ROUTINE). This routine also calculates the sonic
velocities for each node. The minimum time step found is the predicted
time step for the next cycle. However, the actual PLUTO2 time step,
which is used both in the pin and in the channel calculation, is the
smaller of the pin and channel hydrodynamics time steps. The channel
time step is usually the smaller one, and thus, dominates the time‑step
selection.

[anchor: definition-of-the-generalized-smear-densities-for-the-inpin-calculation]

## 14.2.5. Definition of the Generalized Smear Densities for the In‑pin Calculation

The use of generalized smear densities in PLUTO2 (and LEVITATE) has been
prompted by the many different moving and stationary components in this
problem. Its use also simplifies the differential and finite difference
equations for variable cross section flow. The pie chart in Figure 14.2.1
gives an example of the relative cross sectional areas within a
subassembly or experimental loop at a certain axial elevation.

If the total area of the subassembly is AXMX, the generalized volume
fraction of a certain component $k$ is:

$$\theta_{\text{k}}\left( z,t \right) = \frac{A_{\text{k}}\left( z,t \right)}{\text{AXMX}}$$ [eq 14.2-2]

Figure 14.2.1 The Left-hand Side of This Pie Chart Illustrates the Possible Material Cross Sectional Areas in the Fuel Pin, the Whole Pie Representing an Area AXMW Which is an Input Parameter

where $A_{\text{k}}$ is the cross sectional area occupied by component
 $k$ (the latter refers, e.g., to the cavities or the moving fuel in all
failed pins within the subassembly cross section). The reference area
AXMX, which is an input quantity, can be arbitrarily chosen. This is
because the code is invariant to the choice of AXMX (i.e., as long as it
is not varied by several orders of magnitude which can lead to
differences due to truncation errors). However, the recommended value of
AXMX is the cross sectional area of a subassembly or experiment test
section (including the can wall) because the volume fractions of the
different components that appear in the PLUTO2 output are better
understood in this case.

The generalized volume fraction of the free fission gas and fuel vapor
in the cavity is the difference between the cavity volume fraction and
the fuel volume fraction.

$$\theta_{\text{fica}}\left( z,t \right) = \theta_{\text{ca}}\left( z,t \right) - \theta_{\text{fuca}}\left( z,t \right)$$ [eq 14.2-3]

where

 $\theta_{\text{fica}}$ = generalized volume fraction of the free fission gas
and fuel vapor in the cavities of the failed pins.

 $\theta_{\text{ca}}$ = generalized volume fraction of the molten cavities in
all failed pins which can be calculated from $A_{\text{ca}} \big/ \text{AXMX}$ 

 $\theta_{\text{fuca}}$ = generalized volume fraction of the fuel in the
cavities of all failed pins

Generalized smear densities, which are always marked by a prime, are
defined as products of physical densities and generalized volume
fractions:

$${\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} \left( z,t \right) = \rho_{\text{fuca}}\left( T \right)\theta_{\text{fuca}}\left( z,t \right) = \frac{\rho_{\text{fuca}}\left( T \right) A_{\text{fuca}}\left( z,t \right)}{\text{AXMX}}$$ [eq 14.2-4]

$${\rho'}_{\text{fica}} \left( z,t \right) = \rho_{\text{fica}}\left( T,P \right)\theta_{\text{fica}}\left( z,t \right) = \frac{\rho_{\text{fica}}\left( T,P \right) A_{\text{fica}}\left( z,t \right)}{\text{AXMX}}$$ [eq 14.2-5]

$${\rho'}_{\text{fsca}} \left( z,t \right) = \rho_{\text{fsca}}\left( z,t \right)\theta_{\text{fuca}}\left( z,t \right) = \frac{\rho_{\text{fsca}}\left( z,t \right) A_{\text{fuca}}\left( z,t \right)}{\text{AXMX}}$$ [eq 14.2-6]

where the subscript $\text{fsca}$ refers to the fission gas which is dissolved
in the cavity fuel. The temperature $T$ is the fuel temperature, which
should actually be written with subscript $\text{fuca}$ . It should again be
pointed out that the A’s refer to total cross section areas of all the
cavity fuel, free fission gas, and dissolved fission gas in the failed
pins of one subassembly.

The generalized source or sink term is written as:

$$S' = \frac{S^{l}}{\text{AXMX}}$$ [eq 14.2-7]

where the source or sink term $S^{l}$ represents a mass source or
sink per unit time and unit length. The primed source or sink term has
the dimension of mass per unit time and per unit smear volume. This unit
of smear volume is a $m^{3}$ of the cell volume $\text{AXMX} \cdot \Delta z$ in
which all relevant components (including components in all failed pins,
the components in all the channels and the structure) are assumed to be
uniformly smeared. From Eq. (14.2-7), a change in the generalized smear
density $\rho'$ due to source or sink $S'$ it just $S' \Delta t$ .

[anchor: differential-equations-for-the-in-pin-fuel-motion-and-description-of-sink-and-source-terms]

## 14.2.6. Differential Equations for the In-pin Fuel Motion and Description of Sink and Source Terms

The equation set for the in-pin fuel motion includes three mass
conservation equations (for fuel, free fission gas, and dissolved
fission gas) and one energy and one momentum conservation equation. The
continuity equation for the molten fuel in the pin cavity is written:

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}(\rho_{\text{fuca}}A_{\text{fuca}}) = - \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( \rho_{\text{fuca}}A_{\text{fuca}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right) + S_{\text{fuca},\text{me}}^{l}\left( z,t \right) - S_{\text{fuca},\text{ej}}^{l}\left( z,t \right)$$ [eq 14.2-8]

where the subscripts $\text{me}$ and $\text{ej}$ refer to fuel melting into and fuel
ejection from the pin cavities of all failed pins, respectively. By
dividing by AXMX and using the definitions of the generalized smear
densities and source and sink terms, Eq. (14.2-8) becomes:

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}{\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} = - \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right) + {S'}_{\text{fuca},\text{me}} - {S'}_{\text{fuca},\text{ej}}$$ [eq 14.2-9]

where the primed sources and sinks are per unit time and per unit smear
volume (see Eq. (14.2-7)). The integrated source term,
 $S'_{\text{fuca,me}} \Delta t_{\text{PL}}$ , which is actually needed
in the finite difference equations of the code, is calculated from

$${S'}_{\text{fuca},\text{me}}\Delta t_{\text{PL}} = \rho_{\text{fu},\text{cabd}}\Delta A_{\text{me}} \text{NRPI} \cdot \frac{\text{FNPI}}{\text{AXMX}}$$ [eq 14.2-10]

here

 $\Delta t_{\text{PL}}$ = PLUTO2 time step

 $\rho_{\text{fu,cabd}}$ = fuel density (including porosity) adjacent to the
cavity boundary,

 $\Delta A_{\text{me}}$ = area of fuel (including porosity) melted into the
cavity per PLUTO2 time step per pin

 $\text{NRPI}$ = number of pins per subassembly,

 $\text{FNPI}$ = fraction of the pins which are failed.

When the solid fuel node adjacent to the cavity has not yet exceeded an
input melt fraction value FNMELT:

$${S'}_{\text{fuca,me}} \Delta t_{\text{PL}} = 0$$ [eq 14.2-11]

The $\Delta A_{\text{me}}$ in Eq. (14.2-10) is related to a change in the
cavity diameter by

$$\Delta A_{\text{me}} = \frac{\pi}{4}\Delta D_{\text{ca}}\left( 2D_{\text{ca}} + \Delta D_{\text{ca}} \right)$$ [eq 14.2-12]

In order to avoid adding the whole radial node instantaneously upon
meeting the input melt fraction criterion FNMELT, the radial node is
added gradually beginning at the time FNMELT is reached and the
addition is completed once the melt fraction has exceeded
 $\text{FNMELT} + 0.1$ . Once the melt fraction has become greater
than FNMELT, the change in cavity diameter is calculated from

$$\Delta D_{\text{ca}} = \text{FNMECA} \cdot 2 \cdot \Delta r_{\text{node}}$$ [eq 14.2-13]

where $\Delta r_{\text{node}}$ is the width of the heat-transfer node
adjacent to the cavity wall before it is melted into the cavity.
FNMECA is the fraction of this node width that has melted into the
cavity per PLUTO2 time step.

$$\text{FNMECA} = \frac{\Delta t_{\text{PL}}\left( \frac{\left( T_{\text{cabd}}^{n + 1} - T_{\text{cabd}}^{n} \right)}{\Delta t_{\text{Ht}}} \right)}{\left( 0.1 \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu,liq}} - T_{\text{fu,sol}} \right) \right)} \
 = \frac{\Delta T_{\text{PL}}}{\left( 0.1 \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu,liq}} - T_{\text{fu,sol}} \right) \right)}$$ [eq 14.2-14]

where

 $T_{\text{cabd}}^{n}, T_{\text{cabd}}^{n + 1}$ are the
temperatures of the fuel node adjacent to the cavity at the beginning
and at the end of the heat-transfer time step $\Delta t_{\text{Ht}}$ ,
respectively.

 $T_{\text{fu},\text{liq}}, T_{\text{fu},\text{sol}}$ are fuel
liquidus and solidus temperatures, respectively. The difference between
the two is the melting band width.

 $\Delta t_{\text{PL}}$ is the PLUTO2 time step.

 $\Delta T_{\text{PL}}$ is the temperature change of the fuel adjacent to the
cavity during a PLUTO2 time step.

Eq. (14.2-14) implies that the whole heat-transfer node will be
melted into the cavity after its temperature has risen by 1/10 of the
melting band width beyond the input value FNMELT. Moreover, it is
checked whether the neighboring solid fuel node also has exceeded the
input melt fraction criterion FNMELT. If this is the case, the entire
remaining node currently melting into the cavity is added immediately to
the cavity. This situation can occur in TREAT experiments.

The sink term ${S'}_{\text{fuca,ej}}$ that is due to fuel ejection is also
the source term for the coolant channel equations. It will be described
in detail in Section 14.3. Its integrated form is similar to
Eq. (14.2-10)

$${S'}_{\text{fuca},\text{ej}} \cdot \Delta t_{\text{PL}} = {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} \cdot \text{FN}$$ [eq 14.2-15]

where

 $\text{FN}$ = fraction of the fuel in an ejecting cavity cell that is actually
ejected during a PLUTO2 time step.

The free fission-gas mass conservation equation is written

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}\left( \rho_{\text{fica}}A_{\text{fica}} \right) = - \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( \rho_{\text{fica}}A_{\text{fica}}u_{\text{fuca}} \right) + S_{\text{fica},\text{me}}^{l}\left( z,t \right) - S_{\text{fica},\text{ej}}^{l} + S_{\text{fsca,rl}}^{l}$$ [eq 14.2-16]

where the subscripts $\text{fsca}$ and $r l$ refer to
fission gas in solution and to the release of this dissolved fission
gas, respectively. Dividing by AXMX and by using the definition of the
generalized smear densities and source and sink terms yields

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}{\rho'}_{\text{fica}} = - \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fica}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right) + S_{\text{fica},\text{me}}^{l} - S_{\text{fica,ej}}^{l} + S_{\text{fsca,rl}}^{l}$$ [eq 14.2-17]

The integrated source term for free fission gas due to fuel melt-in is
similar to that in Eq. (14.2-10):

$${S'}_{\text{fica,me}} \Delta t_{\text{PL}} = \rho_{\text{fifs,cabd}} \Delta A_{\text{me}} \left( \text{NRPI} \cdot \frac{\text{FNPI}}{\text{AXMX}} \right) \cdot \text{FIFNGB}$$ [eq 14.2-18]

where $\Delta A_{\text{me}}$ is the calculated change in cavity cross
sectional area described before (see Eq. (14.2-12)),
 $\rho_{\text{fifs,cabd}}$ is the density of all the gas in the fuel node
adjacent to the cavity, and FIFNGB is an input parameter determining
the fraction of all the gas entering the cavity with the molten fuel
which instantaneously becomes free gas. This is an input parameter
because DEFORM does not currently discriminate between intra-granular
and grain-boundary gas. The ratio of the grain-boundary gas to the total
gas in a node may be similar to the fraction of the gas that becomes
free upon melting into the cavity. However, it seems more likely that
only a smaller fraction will be instantaneously available because some
of the grain-boundary bubbles may not be large enough to be considered
free gas as soon as the fuel melts.

The quantity $\rho_{\text{fifs,cabd}}$ is calculated from:

$$\rho_{\text{fifs,cabd}} = \text{RETFG2}_{\text{cabd}} \frac{\left( \frac{\text{FUMS}_{\text{cabd}}}{\text{FUELM}} S_{\text{cabd}} \right)}{\text{VOLUME}_{\text{cabd}}}$$ [eq 14.2-19]

where

 $\text{RETFG2}_{\text{cabd}}$ is the total retained fission-gas mass in the
original radial fuel-pin node at the cavity boundary before it has
actually melted in,

 $\text{FUMS}_{\text{cabd}}$ is is the current fuel mass in the melting radial
fuel-pin node at the cavity boundary,

 $\text{FUELMS}_{\text{cabd}}$ is the original fuel mass of the radial fuel-pin
node at the cavity boundary before any fuel is removed due to melt-in,

 $\text{VOLUME}_{\text{cabd}}$ is the current volume of the melting radial
fuel-pin node at the cavity boundary.

The free fission-gas sink term due to fuel ejection in Eq. (14.2-17) is
described in detail in Section 14.3. Its form is similar to that of the
sink term for fuel ejection Eq. (14.2-15):

$${S'}_{\text{fica,ej}} \cdot \Delta t_{\text{PL}} = {\rho'}_{\text{fica}} \cdot \text{FN}$$ [eq 14.2-20]

The term $\text{FN}$ used in this equation is the same as in Eq. (14.2-15)
because it is assumed in PLUTO2 that fission gas and fuel are
ejected with the same volume fractions that exist in the ejecting cavity
node.

The source term due to dissolved fission-gas release in Eq. (14.2-17) is:

$${S'}_{\text{fsca},\text{r}l} = {\rho'}_{\text{fsca}} \cdot \text{CIRTFS}$$ [eq 14.2-21]

where CIRTFS is a release constant for dissolved fission gas which is
input and has the dimensions $s^{-1}$ . (The same release
constant is also used for the dissolved fission-gas release in the
coolant channels - see Eq. (14.4-20)). This is a relatively simple
exponential decay-type approach to treat the release of the gas
dissolved in molten fuel. However, the understanding of the mechanism of
dissolved gas release from molten fuel is still very limited.

The dissolved fission-gas mass conservation equation is:

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}\left( \rho_{\text{fsca}} A_{\text{fuca}} \right) = - \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( \rho_{\text{fsca}} A_{\text{fuca}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right) + S_{\text{fsca,me}}^{l} - S_{\text{fsca,ej}}^{l} - S_{\text{fsca,rl}}^{l}$$ [eq 14.2-22]

By dividing this equation by $\text{AXMX}$ and using the definitions of the
generalized smear density and sources and sinks, one obtains:

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}{\rho'}_{\text{fsca}} = - \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fica}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right) + S_{\text{fsca,me}}^{l} - S_{\text{fsca,ej}}^{l} - S_{\text{fsca,rl}}^{l}$$ [eq 14.2-23]

where

$${S'}_{\text{fsca,me}} = {S'}_{\text{fica,me}} \frac{\left( 1 - \text{FIFNGB} \right)}{\text{FIFNGB}}$$ [eq 14.2-24]

and $S'_{\text{fica,me}}$ and FIFNGB are defined for Eq. (14.2-18). The
ejection term is connected to the one for the free fission-gas ejection,
which is given in Eq. (14.2-20):

$${S'}_{\text{fsca,ej}} = {S'}_{\text{fica,ej}}\frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fsca}}}{{\rho'}_{\text{fica}}}$$ [eq 14.2-25]

The absolute value of the sink term due to the dissolved fission-gas
release has been described in Eq. (14.2-21).

The fuel energy conservation equation is written:

$$\begin{split}\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}\left( \rho_{\text{fuca}} e_{\text{fuca}} A_{\text{fuca}} \right) = & - \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( \rho_{\text{fuca}} e_{\text{fuca}} A_{\text{fuca}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right) + S_{\text{fuca,me}}^{l} e_{\text{fu,cabd}} \\
& - {S'}_{\text{fuca,ej}} e_{\text{fuca}} + Q A_{\text{fuca}}\rho_{\text{fuca}} \\
& - h_{\text{fuca,cabd}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fuca}} - T_{\text{fu,cabd}} \right) \pi D_{\text{ca}} \text{NRPI} \cdot \text{FNPI}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.2-26]

Dividing Eq. (14.2-26) by AXMX and using the definitions of the
generalized smear densities and sources and sinks produces:

$$\begin{split}\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} e_{\text{fuca}} \right) = & - \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} e_{\text{fuca}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right) + {S'}_{\text{fuca,me}} e_{\text{fu,cabd}} \\
& - S_{\text{fuca,ej}}^{l} e_{\text{fuca}} + Q {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} \\
& - h_{\text{fuca,cabd}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fuca}} - T_{\text{fu,cabd}} \right) \pi D_{\text{ca}} \text{NRPI} \cdot \frac{\text{FNPI}}{\text{AXMX}}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.2-27]

By rewriting the left-hand side of Eq. (14.2-27) as

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}e_{\text{fuca}} \right) = {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}} e_{\text{fuca}} + e_{\text{fuca}} \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}} {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}$$ [eq 14.2-28]

and by using the mass conservation Eq. (14.2-8), one obtains

$$\begin{split}{\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}e_{\text{fuca}} = & - \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}e_{\text{fuca}}u_{\text{fuca}} \right) + e_{\text{fuca}} \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right) \\
& + {S'}_{\text{fuca,ej}} \left( e_{\text{fu,cabd}} - e_{\text{fuca}} \right) + Q {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} \\
& - h_{\text{fuca,cabd}}\left( T_{\text{fuca}} - T_{\text{fu,cabd}} \right) \pi D_{\text{ca}} \text{NRPI} \cdot \frac{\text{FNPI}}{\text{AXMX}}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.2-29]

where $Q$ is the fission heat source per kg of fuel

$$Q = \text{FNPOHE} \cdot \text{POW} \cdot \text{PSHAPE} \left( K \right) \cdot \left( 1 - \text{GAMSS} - \text{GAMTNC} - \text{GAMTNE} \right) \cdot \frac{F_{\text{POWER}}}{\text{FUMASS}\left( K \right)}$$ [eq 14.2-30]

In Eq. (14.2-30),

$$\text{FNPOHE} = \exp\left\lbrack \text{POWCOF}\left( 1 \right) + \Delta t\left( \text{POWCOF}\left( 2 \right) + \Delta t_{\text{x}}\text{POWCOF}\left( 3 \right) \right) \right\rbrack$$ [eq 14.2-31]

where $\Delta t_{\text{x}}$ is the time between the current PLUTO2 time
and the beginning of the current main (point kinetics) time step. The
POWCOF’s are the coefficients that are found by fitting an
exponential function to the power levels at the end of the last three
point kinetics time step.

 $\text{POW}$ = steady-state power in the peak axial fuel-pin segment (see SAS4A
input description)

 $\text{PSHAPE} \left( K \right)$ = ratio of pin power at axial node $K$ to POW (see SAS4A
input description)

 $\text{GAMSS, GAMTNC, GAMTNE}$ = fractions of total power for the direct
heating of structure, coolant, and cladding, respectively. (See SAS4A
input description)

 $\text{FUMASS} \left( K \right)$ = initial total fuel mass in axial pin segment $K$ 

 $F_{\text{POWER}}$ = power reduction factor if there is a radial power
gradient in the pin (as is common in TREAT experiments):

$$F_{\text{POWER}} = \frac{\sum_{\text{I=1}}^{I_{\text{cabd}}}{\text{PSHAPR}\left( I \right) \cdot \text{FUELMS}\left( I,K \right) \big/ \
\sum_{\text{I=1}}^{I_{\text{cabd}}}{\text{FUELMS}\left( I,K \right)}}}{\sum_{\text{I=1}}^{\text{NT}}{\text{PSHAPR}\left( I \right) \
\cdot \text{FUELMS}\left( I,K \right) \big/ \sum_{\text{I=1}}^{\text{NT}}{\text{FUELMS}\left( I,K \right)}}}$$ [eq 14.2-32]

where

 $\text{NT}$ = number of radial pin nodes

 $I_{\text{cabd}}$ = number of radial pin nodes in the cavity

 $\text{PSHAPR} \left( I \right)$ = mass normalized radial power distribution in radial node
 $I$ (See SAS4A input description)

 $\text{FUELMS} \left( I,K \right)$ = initial fuel mass in the radial fuel-pin node $I$ , $K$ .

The heat-transfer coefficient in Eq. (14.2-26) is the sum of a convective
and a conduction heat transfer term.

$$h_{\text{fuca},\text{cabd}} = \left( h_{1} + h_{2} \right)$$

where

$$h_{1} = \frac{k_{\text{fu}}}{D_{\text{ca}}} \cdot \text{St} \cdot \text{Pr} \cdot \text{Re}$$ [eq 14.2-33]

This comes from the definition of the Nusselt number

$$\text{Nu} = \text{St} \cdot \text{Pr} \cdot \text{Re}$$ [eq 14.2-34]

where

St = Stanton number = $\frac{h}{\left( \rho u C_{\text{p}} \right)}$ 

Pr = Prandtl number = $\mu \frac{C_{\text{p}}}{k}$ 

Re = Reynolds numbers = $D \frac{\rho u}{\mu}$ 

The Deissler correlation [14-22, 14-23] was used for finding the
relationship between the three nondimensional numbers on the right-hand
side of Eq. (14.2-34). The Prandtl number for fuel is about 2.2. By using
this value in the Deissler correlation, it can be shown that

$$\text{St} \approx 0.0158 \text{Re}^{- 0.2}$$ [eq 14.2-35]

By using Eq. (14.2-8) and the definition of the Prandtl number,

$$h_{1} = \frac{1}{D_{\text{ca}}} \cdot \mu_{\text{fu,liq}} \cdot C_{\text{p,fu}} \cdot \text{CIA3} \cdot \text{Re}_{\text{ca}}^{0.8}$$ [eq 14.2-36]

where

 $C_{\text{p,fu}}$ = Heat capacity of fuel, which is input (CPFU)

 $\mu_{\text{fu,liq}}$ = Liquid fuel viscosity, which is input (VIFULQ)

 $\text{CIA3}$ = input constant. A value of CIA3 = 0.0158 is recommended because of Eq. (14.2-35)

$$\text{Re}_{\text{ca}} = \frac{\left( \frac{\left| u_{\text{fuca}} \right| D_{\text{ca}} {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}}{\theta_{\text{ca}}} \right)}{\mu_{\text{fu,liq}}}$$ [eq 14.2-37]

The conduction heat-transfer coefficient, $h_{2}$ , which is
relevant for a low flow or a stagnant flow condition (the stagnant
condition is assumed in the simplified PLUTO2 node — see Section 14.1.2), is of the following form

$$h_{2} = \frac{k_{\text{fu}}}{D_{\text{ca}}}4$$ [eq 14.2-38]

The pressure calculation in the fuel-pin cavity is based on the
assumption that the fission-gas pressure and fuel-vapor pressure can be
added. The total cavity pressure is:

$$P_{\text{ca}} = P_{\text{fica}}\left( T_{\text{fuca}}, {\rho}_{\text{fica}} \right) + P_{\text{fvca}} \left( T_{\text{fuca}} \right)$$ [eq 14.2-39]

where the fission-gas pressure is calculated form a special form of the
ideal-gas equation which takes the compressibility of the liquid fuel
into account:

$$P_{\text{fica}} = \frac{R_{\text{fi}} \cdot T_{\text{fuca}}{\rho'}_{\text{fica}}}{\left( \theta_{\text{ca}} - \theta_{\text{fuca}} + \theta_{\text{fuca}} K_{\text{fu}} \cdot P_{\text{fica}} \right)}$$ [eq 14.2-40]

where

 $R_{\text{fi}}$ = the universal gas constant divided by the molecular
weight of the mixture of fission gas and helium fill gas. $R_{\text{fi}}$ 
is equal to an input value RGAS which should take into account the
relative amounts of krypton, xenon, and helium. The latter may be
important for near-fresh fuel.

 $K_{\text{fu}}$ = liquid fuel compressibility which is input (see CMFU).

The physically reasonable solution of the quadratic Eq. (14.2-40) is:

$$P_{\text{fica}} = \frac{- \left( \theta_{\text{ca}} - \theta_{\text{fuca}} \right) + \sqrt{\left( \theta_{\text{ca}} - \
\theta_{\text{fuca}} \right)^{2} + 4\theta_{\text{fuca}} K_{\text{fu}} \cdot R_{\text{fi}} \
\cdot T_{\text{fuca}} {\rho'}_{\text{fica}}}}{2 \theta_{\text{fuca}} K_{\text{fu}}}$$ [eq 14.2-41]

There is also a second solution with a minus sign in front of the square
root, which does not give a physically reasonable result.
Eq. (14.2-41) reduces to a single-phase liquid pressure solution for no
fission gas and $\theta_{\text{fuca}} > \theta_{\text{ca}}$ :

$$P_{\text{fica}} = - \frac{\left( \theta_{\text{ca}} - \theta_{\text{fuca}} \right)}{\left( \theta_{\text{fuca}}K_{\text{fu}} \right)}$$ [eq 14.2-42]

which is equivalent to the definition of the fuel compressibility. For
void fractions greater than 30% the fission-gas pressure is calculated
from a modified Eq. (14.2-40) in which the term with
 $K_{\text{fu}}$ is dropped.

If the dissolved fission gas present in the molten fuel cavity is
assumed to occupy a negligible volume, in comparison with the volume
occupied by the free gas then the $\theta_{\text{fuca}}$ in Eq. (14.2-40) and
14.2-34 reflects the actual volume occupied by the molten fuel. This
assumption is justified when the ambient cavity pressure is
significantly smaller than the bubble surface tension pressure, as was
the case in all TREAT experiments analyzed with SAS4A. When this
assumption is used, the dissolved fission gas does not affect the cavity
pressure until it is released, in a gradual manner, to the free gas
field.

However, during a transient characterized by a rapid increase in the
power level, the cavity pressures can reach higher values, so that the
influence of the dissolved fission gas becomes important. In order to
address this issue the dissolved fission gas modeling in the pin cavity
was introduced as described below.

The dissolved fission gas is assumed to exist in the form of small
bubbles, with the gas inside the bubbles at the pressure
 $P_{\text{bubble}}$ :

 $P_{\text{bubble}} = P_{\text{surface tension}} + P_{\text{cavity}}$ .

The quantity $P_{\text{surface tension}}$ is an input to the code
(PRSFTN). Its value can be determined as:

$$P_{\text{surface tension}} = \frac{2\sigma}{r},$$

where:

 $\sigma$ = bubble surface tension,

 $r$ = bubble radius.

The recommended value for $P_{\text{surface tension}}$ is $4 \times 10^{7}$ Pa,
corresponding to $\sigma = 0.4$ N/m (400 dyne/cm) and $r = 2 \times 10^{-8}$ m (200 Å).
The surface tension pressure is assumed to
remain constant during the calculations. Furthermore, in order to
simplify the calculations, the pressure $P_{\text{cavity}}$ used in the
calculation of the bubble pressure $P_{\text{bubble}}$ is the cavity
pressure at the end of the previous time step. The volume occupied by
the dissolved gas in the axial cavity cell i is then calculated using
the equation:

$$V_{\text{D,i}} = \frac{M_{\text{D,i}} \cdot R \cdot T_{\text{i}}}{m \cdot P_{\text{bubble,i}}} = \frac{R}{m} \cdot \frac{M_{\text{D,i}} \cdot T_{\text{i}}}{P_{\text{bubble,i}}}$$

where:

 $M_{\text{D,I}}$ = mass of dissolved fission gas in cell $i$ ,

 $\frac{R}{m}$ = universal gas constant divided by molar mass,

 $T_{\text{i}}$ = gas temperature in cell $i$ , assumed to be equal to the
molten fuel temperature,

 $P_{\text{bubble,I}}$ = the pressure of the gas contained in the small
bubbles, calculated above.

The fuel and dissolved gas are assumed to form a homologous mixture,
with the volume given by:

$$V_{\text{fuel}}^{\text{mixture}} = V_{\text{fuel,i}} + V_{\text{D,i}},$$

where:

 $V_{\text{fuel,I}}$ = molten fuel volume in cell $i$ ,

 $V_{\text{D,i}}$ = dissolved gas volume in cell $i$ .

The calculation then proceeds as before, using the volume
 $V_{\text{fuel,i}}^{\text{mixture}}$ instead of
 $V_{\text{fuel,i}}$ to determine the value of $\theta_{\text{fuca}}$ 
used in Eq. (14.2-40) and Eq. (14.2-41).

When there is little molten fuel in an axial cavity cell, i.e., the gas
occupies a large fraction of the cell volume, a perfect gas equation is
used to determine the free gas pressure. The underlying assumption is
that the compressibility of the fuel/dissolved-gas-mixture has a
negligible effect under these circumstances. However, if larger amounts
of molten fuel are present, the pressure calculation takes into account
the molten fuel compressibility. In this case, the dissolved fission gas
and molten fuel volumes are lumped together and assumed to have the same
compressibility as the molten fuel. This is a simplifying assumption,
but is conservative in the sense that the molten fuel/dissolved gas
mixture is likely to have a higher compressibility than the molten fuel
itself and thus would lead to somewhat lower cavity pressures during
rapid power excursions.

This treatment of the dissolved fission gas has also been implemented in
DEFORM-4, LEVITATE, and PLUTO2. If the input constant PRSFTN is less
than $10^{7}$ the effect of the dissolved fission gas on the ambient
pressure is ignored.

The momentum conservation equation for the fuel/fission-gas mixture is:

$$\begin{split}\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}\left( \rho_{\text{fuca}}A_{\text{fuca}}u_{\text{fuca}} + \rho_{\text{fica}}A_{\text{fica}}u_{\text{fuca}} \right) \\
= - \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( \rho_{\text{fuca}} A_{\text{fuca}}u_{\text{fuca}}^{2} + \rho_{\text{fica}}A_{\text{fica}}u_{\text{fuca}}^{2} \right) \\
- A_{\text{ca}} \cdot \left( \frac{\partial \text{P}_{\text{ca}}}{\partial \text{z}} + \frac{\partial \text{P}_{\text{vi}}}{\partial \text{z}} \right) - g \left( \rho_{\text{fuca}} A_{\text{fuca}} + \rho_{\text{fica}}A_{\text{fica}} \right) \\
- u_{\text{fuca}} \left| u_{\text{fuca}} \right| \cdot \left( \rho_{\text{fuca}} \frac{A_{\text{fuca}}}{A_{\text{ca}}} + \rho_{\text{fica}} \frac{A_{\text{fica}}}{A_{\text{ca}}} \right) \frac{A_{\text{ca}} \cdot F_{\text{friction}}}{\left( 2D_{\text{ca}} \right)} \\
- \left( S_{\text{fuca,ej}}^{l} + S_{\text{fica,ej}}^{l} \right) u_{\text{fuca}}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.2-43]

Dividing Eq. (14.2-43) by AXMX and using the definitions for the
generalized smear densities and mass sinks gives:

$$\begin{split}\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}\left\lbrack u_{\text{fuca}}\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fica}} \right) \right\rbrack = \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left\lbrack u_{\text{fuca}}^{2}\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fica}} \right) \right\rbrack \\
- \theta_{\text{ca}} \left( \frac{\partial \text{P}_{\text{ca}}}{\partial \text{z}} + \frac{\partial \text{P}_{\text{vi}}}{\partial \text{z}} \right) - g \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fica}} \right) \\
- u_{\text{fuca}} \left| u_{\text{fuca}} \right| \cdot \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fica}} \right) \frac{F_{\text{friction}}}{\left( 2D_{\text{ca}} \right)} \\
- \left( {S'}_{\text{fuca,ej}} + {S'}_{\text{fica,ej}} \right) u_{\text{fuca}}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.2-44]

 $u_{\text{fuca}}$ = vertically upward fuel velocity in the cavity (see
the sign of the gravity head term in Eq. (14.2-43)).

 $P_{\text{vi}}$ = artificial viscous pressure for stabilizing test
problems involving shock wave propagation and shock reflection from a
rigid boundary. Not necessary for regular cavity blowdown problems.

If the net free fission-gas mass flux into a numerical node is negative
(i.e., for net outflow), then $P_{\text{vi}} = 0$ .

If the net convective free fission-gas mass flux into a numerical cell
is positive [14-27]:

$$P_{\text{vi}} = \frac{\text{C2VIPR} \cdot 0.5 \cdot \left( {p'}_{\text{fu,K}} + {p'}_{\text{fi,K}} \right) \cdot \left( u_{\text{fuca,K+1}} - u_{\text{fica,K}} \right)^{2}}{\theta_{\text{ficaxx,K}}}$$ [eq 14.2-45]

where

 $K$ = index of the axial cavity node for which $P_{\text{vi}}$ is being
evaluated

 $\text{C2VIPR}$ = input constant which determines the magnitude of the
numerical damping.

$$\begin{split} \theta_{\text{ficaxx}} = \begin{cases}
\theta_{\text{fica}} \text{ for } \theta_{\text{fica}} > \theta_{\text{ca}} \cdot \text{C1VIPR} \\
\theta_{\text{ca}} - \text{C1VIPR} \text{ for } \theta_{\text{fica}} < \theta_{\text{ca}} \cdot \text{C1VIPR} \\
\end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.2-46]

where

 $\text{C1VIPR}$ = Input constant

The Moody friction factor $F_{\text{friction}}$ in Eq. (14.2-44) depends
on the Reynolds number

$$\text{Re}_{\text{pi}} = \frac{\left| u_{\text{fuca}} \right| D_{\text{ca}} \cdot \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fica}} \right)}{\left( \theta_{\text{cs}} \cdot \text{VIFULQ} \right)}$$ [eq 14.2-47]

where VIFULQ is the viscosity of liquid fuel which is input. The
friction factor is

$$\begin{split} F_{\text{friction}} = \begin{cases}
\frac{64}{\text{Re}_{\text{pi}}} & \text{for } \text{Re}_{\text{pi}} \text{ CIREFU} \\
\text{CIFRFU} & \text{for } \text{Re}_{\text{pi}} \text{ CIREFU} \\
\end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.2-48]

where CIREFU and CIFRFU are both input and should be made consistent
in order to avoid a jump in the friction factor at $\text{Re}_{\text{pi}} = \text{CIREFU}$ .

The last term in Eq. (14.2-44) is necessary because the total momentum in
the cell decreases due to ejection and this has to be considered in a
momentum equation written in conservative form. There is no term
accounting for the fuel melt-in because this fuel is added to the cavity
with zero axial velocity, and therefore does not change the total
momentum. However, since the generalized fuel smear density will change
in a cell with melt-in, this will lead to a velocity decrease in such a
cell.

[anchor: finite-difference-equations-for-the-in-pin-motion]

## 14.2.7. Finite Difference Equations for the In-pin Motion

In the overview of the numerical scheme given in Section 14.2.4, it was
pointed out that full donor cell spatial differencing and a largely
explicit time differencing are used for treating the in-pin motion. The
implicit aspect of the solution is that the mass and energy conservation
equations are solved first and then a pressure is calculated on the
basis of the mass and energy equation results. This advanced pressure is
used in the momentum conservation equation.

The finite differencing of all the mass conservation equations is the
same. The fuel mass conservation is used as an illustration.

$$\frac{\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca,K}}^{n + 1} - {\rho'}_{\text{fuca,K}}^{n} \right)}{\Delta t_{\text{PL}}} = \
 - \frac{\left( \left( {\rho'} u \right)_{\text{fuca,K+1}} - \left( {\rho'} u \right)_{\text{fuca,K}} \right)}{\Delta z_{\text{K}}} + \sum_{\text{k}}{{S'}_{\text{K,k}}}$$ [eq 14.2-49]

where

$$\begin{split} \left( {\rho'} u \right)_{\text{fuca,K}} = \begin{cases}
{\rho'}_{\text{fuca,K-1}} u_{\text{K}} & \text{for } u_{\text{K}} > 0 \\
{\rho'}_{\text{fuca,K}} u_{\text{K}} & \text{for } u_{\text{K}} < 0 \\
\end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.2-50]

 $u_{\text{K}}$ = fuel velocity at the mesh cell boundary $K$ .

 ${\rho'}_{\text{fuca,K-1}}$ = generalized fuel smear density at the mesh
cell midpoint below boundary $K$ 

 ${\rho'}_{\text{fuca,K}}$ = generalized fuel smear density at the mesh cell
midpoint above boundary $K$ 

The numerical grid used in the program was discussed in Section 14.2.4,
which gives an overview of the numerical scheme. Densities are at the
cell centers and velocities at the cell edges (see schematic before the
momentum conservation Eq. (14.2-61)). The source and sink terms have
already been described in their finite difference form in the previous
section.

The convective fluxes at the lower and upper boundaries of the cavity
that are located in the end cells KK1 and KKMX, respectively, are

$$\left( {\rho'} u \right)_{\text{fuca,KK1}} = 0$$ [eq 14.2-51]

and

$$\left( {\rho'} u \right)_{\text{fuca,KKMX+1}} = 0$$ [eq 14.2-52]

The end cells are not always the same during a PLUTO2 run because
the molten cavity can extend axially. When a new cell is added to the
cavity, mass can only flow into this end cell if its cross section is at
least 20% of that of the neighboring cell in the molten cavity. This had
to be done because of problems with overcompression of cells with a very
small cross section.

The finite difference form of the fuel energy Eq. (14.2-29) is:

$$\begin{split}\frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fuca,K}} \left( e_{\text{fuca,K}}^{n + 1} - e_{\text{fuca,K}}^{n} \right)}{\Delta t_{\text{PL}}} = - \left\lbrack \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} e_{\text{fuca}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right)_{\text{K+1}}^{n} \right. \\ \left.
- \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} e_{\text{fuca}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right)_{\text{K}}^{n} \right\rbrack \big/ \Delta z_{\text{K}} + e_{\text{fuca,K}}^{n} \left\lbrack \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right)_{\text{K+1}}^{n} \right. \\ \left.
- \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right)_{\text{K}}^{n} \right\rbrack \big/ \Delta z_{\text{K}} + {S'}_{\text{fuca,me,K}}^{n} \left( e_{\text{fu,cabd,K}}^{n} - e_{\text{fuca,K}}^{n} \right) \\
+ Q_{\text{K}}^{n} {\rho'}_{\text{fuca,K}}^{n} - h_{\text{fuca,cabd,K}}^{n} \left( T_{\text{fuca,K}}^{n} - T_{\text{fu,cabd,K}}^{n} \right) \pi D_{\text{ca,K}}^{n} \frac{\text{NRPI} \cdot \text{FNPI}}{\text{AXMX}} \\\end{split}$$ [eq 14.2-53]

The fuel cavity temperature $T_{\text{fuca}}$ in the above equation has
to be calculated from the internal energy:

$$\begin{split} & \text{For } e_{\text{fu,sol}} < e_{\text{fuca}} < e_{\text{fu,liq}}~ , \\
 & T_{\text{fuca}} = T_{\text{fu,sol}} + \left( T_{\text{fu,liq}} - T_{\text{fu,sol}} \right) \cdot \frac{\left( e_{\text{fuca}} - e_{\text{fu,sol}} \right)}{\left( e_{\text{fu,liq}} - e_{\text{fu,sol}} \right)}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.2-54]

$$\begin{split} & \text{For } e_{\text{fuca}} > e_{\text{fu,liq}}~ , \\
 & T_{\text{fuca}} = T_{\text{fu,liq}} + \frac{\left( e_{\text{fuca}} - e_{\text{fu,liq}} \right)}{C_{\text{p,fu}}}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.2-55]

where $C_{\text{p,fu}}$ is the fuel specific heat which is the single
input value CPFU. The convective energy flux at cell boundary $K$ in
Eq. (14.2-53) in calculated as:

$$\begin{split} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} e_{\text{fuca}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right)_{\text{k}} = \begin{cases}
\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} e_{\text{fuca}} \right)_{\text{K-1}} u_{\text{fuca,K}} \text{for } u_{\text{fuca,K}} > 0 \\
\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} e_{\text{fuca}} \right)_{\text{K}} u_{\text{fuca,K}} \text{for } u_{\text{fuca,K}} < 0 \\
\end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.2-56]

At the lower and upper cavity ends that are in cells $\text{KK1}$ and $\text{KKMX}$ , the
convective energy fluxes are zero.

$$\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} e_{\text{fuca}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right)_{\text{KK1}}^{n} = 0$$ [eq 14.2-57]

and

$$\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}} e_{\text{fuca}} u_{\text{fuca}} \right)_{\text{KKMX+1}}^{n} = 0$$ [eq 14.2-58]

By using the convective fluxes from Eq. (14.2-50) and Eq. (14.2-56), and
the definitions of the energy gain and loss terms given earlier, and by
differencing the second term of Eq. (14.2-53) like the first, Eq. (14.2-53)
can be solved for $e_{\text{fuca,K}}^{n + 1}$ . Fuel temperatures
that are shown in the PLUTO2 output are calculated by using Eq. (14.2-54)
and Eq. (14.2-55).

For the finite difference form of the momentum equation the following
quantities have to be defined at the edges of the numerical cells: the
combined fuel/fission-gas generalized smear density and the cavity
volume fraction. These quantities become:

$${\rho'}_{\text{fufi,bk}} = 0.5 \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuca,K-1}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fuca,K}} \right) + 0.5 \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fica,K-1}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fica,K}} \right)$$ [eq 14.2-59]

$$\theta_{\text{ca,bk}} = 0.5 \left( \theta_{\text{ca,K}} + \theta_{\text{ca,K-1}} \right)$$ [eq 14.2-60]

where the subscript $bk$ indicates that these quantities are at the
lower boundaries of cell $K$ . This is shown on the schematic below. On
the numerical grid the velocities are also defined on the cell
boundaries, whereas the pressures, densities and volume fractions are
defined at the cell centers. This is also shown in the following
schematic.

 | 
 $\theta_{\text{bk}}$ 
 | 
 | 
 $\theta_{\text{bk+1}}$ 
 | 
 | | 

 | 
 ${\rho'}_{\text{bk}}$ 
 | 
 | 
 $\rho_{\text{bk+1}}$ 
 | 
 | | 

 | 
 $u_{\text{K}}$ 
 | 
 | 
 $u_{\text{K+1}}$ 
 | 
 | | 

 | 
 $\theta_{\text{K-1}}$ 
 | 
 | 
 $\theta_{\text{K}}$ 
 | 
 | 
 $\theta_{\text{K+1}}$ 
 |


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[page: Part04/Ch14/fuel-ejection.html]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[anchor: fuel-and-fission-gas-ejection-from-the-pins]

# 14.3. Fuel and Fission-gas Ejection from the Pins

[anchor: physical-model-and-assumptions]

## 14.3.1. Physical Model and Assumptions

In the previous section, the sinks for the in-pin motion due to fuel and
fission-gas ejection appeared in the fuel, free fission gas, and
dissolved fission-gas mass conservation equations (see Eq. (14.2-9),
14.2-15, and 14.2-20). These sink terms are, of course, source terms in
the channel thermal-hydraulics treatment.

The approach taken for the calculation of the fuel and fission-gas
ejection from the pins is based on the assumption that there will always
be pressure equilibrium established between a cavity node and the
adjacent channel node if fuel and fission-gas ejection occurs. This
assumption is justified for cladding ruptures with dimensions larger
than one-pin diameter because of the very short distance between cavity
nodes and corresponding coolant channel nodes. For pin-hole type
failures leading to a pure gas release, which is not currently treated
in PLUTO2, an orifice equation for calculating this gas release may be
more appropriate. In the older PLUTO code [14-1, 14-3, 14-4], both an
asymptotic orifice equation and an ejection calculation, based on
pressure equilibration, were computed for the fuel and gas ejections,
and the smaller of the two predictions was used. The asymptotic orifice
equation usually predicted the higher ejection rates. These were causing
a higher pressure in the channel node than in the adjacent cavity node
which was considered non-physical.

To achieve the pressure equilibrium between the cavity and channel nodes
in PLUTO2, an estimated amount of fuel and gas (with the same volume
ratio as present in the cavity node) is ejected into the channel and the
resulting cavity and channel pressures are calculated. This calculation
is repeated several times with updated estimates for the ejected fuel
and fission-gas masses until a pressure equilibrium is achieved. This
approach does not consider (or require) the cladding rupture area, which
is an advantage because the evolution of the cladding rupture is not
known. The cladding rupture sizes found in the post-test examinations of
TREAT tests H5 [14-24] and J1 [14-25], which were terminated at a time
when the pins were still largely intact, show large enough rupture sizes
to justify the assumption of pressure equilibration between the cavity
node behind the rupture and the adjacent channel node. Moreover, these
rupture areas are considerably larger than the cross section of the
molten cavity (50% areal melt fraction in an FFTF type pin means a
molten cross sectional area of about 0.1 cm2; cladding rupture
areas in H5 and J1 are about 1 cm2). This means that the
controlling aspect of the fuel and gas ejection (at least in mild TOP
accidents) is really the cross sectional area of the cavity, which is
taken into account in the in-pin motion calculation in PLUTO2. In the
SAS3D model SAS/FCI, which does not consider the in-pin motion
mechanistically, the cross sectional area for the orifice equation, used
in the calculation of the SAS/FCI fuel and gas ejection, has to be set
to about twice the cross sectional area of the cavity near the failure
location [14-3]. Under LOF-driven-TOP conditions, when axial cladding
rupture propagation is likely (see Section 14.3.3), the in-pin motion is
not dominant in controlling the ejection because several contiguous
cavity nodes may eject fuel and gas simultaneously. In addition, the
time scales are very short under these conditions, leading to less axial
fuel and gas convection into an ejection node than can actually be
ejected.

Fuel and fission gas are being ejected from the fuel pins with the same
volume ratio as exists in the ejecting cavity node. For conditions
involving high void fractions in the ejecting cavity node, it is
possible that fission gas or fuel vapor will be ejected preferentially
because the remaining fuel may be in an annular flow configuration.

Another assumption about the fuel and gas ejection is that no backflow
of materials from the channel to the pin is allowed when the pressure in
the coolant channel node adjacent to the rupture becomes higher than the
pressure in the ejection node. To model this backflow would be difficult
and is not warranted because only a small amount of liquid sodium
flowing back into the pin would lead to enough vaporization and
pressurization to inhibit further backflow of materials. However, the
potential pressure increase in the cavity node may diminish the in-pin
fuel motion. This could be beneficial if midplane failures are assumed.
However, most channel pressurizations that have been observed
experimentally and that may be due to FCIs are not sufficient in
magnitude or duration to cause concern about this assumption.

[anchor: numerical-solution-of-the-fuel-and-gas-ejection-calculation]

## 14.3.2. Numerical Solution of the Fuel and Gas Ejection Calculation

The numerical evaluation of the amount of fuel and fission gas ejected
during a PLUTO2 time step is performed as a second step after the fuel
mass conservation Eq. (14.2-9) has been solved and advanced to the end of
the time step without accounting for the ejection term
 $S'_{\text{fuca,ej}}$ . This section describes how the fuel smear
density value obtained at the end of the time step without accounting
for ejection ${\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}^{\text{old}}$ is corrected for
fuel ejection, thus obtaining the actual fuel smear density at the end
of time step the ${\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}^{\text{new}}$ and the
resulting equilibrated pressure of the ejecting cavity cell.

If $\text{FN}_{\text{k}}$ is the fraction of the fuel in a cavity node that is
ejected during a time step, the new generalized fuel smear density in
the cavity node will be:

$${\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}^{\text{new}} = {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}^{\text{old}} - {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}^{\text{old}} \cdot \text{FN}_{\text{k}} = {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}^{\text{old}} - \text{FF}$$ [eq 14.3-1]

where
 $\text{FF} = {\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}^{\text{old}} \cdot \text{FN}_{\text{K}}$ 
and is actually the same as the sink term for fuel ejection,
 ${S'}_{\text{fuca, ej}} \cdot \Delta t_{\text{PL}}$ (see Eq. (14.2-15)).

Since the fission gas and fuel are assumed to be ejected with the same
volume ratio as present in the ejecting cell, the new generalized
free-fission-gas smear density is

$${\rho'}_{\text{fica}}^{\text{new}} = {\rho'}_{\text{fica}}^{\text{old}} - {\rho'}_{\text{fica}}^{\text{old}} \cdot \text{FN}_{\text{k}} = {\rho'}_{\text{fica}}^{\text{old}} - \text{FF} \cdot \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fica}}^{\text{old}}}{{\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}^{\text{old}}}$$ [eq 14.3-2]

The new cavity fuel fraction will be

$$\theta_{\text{fica}}^{\text{new}} = \theta_{\text{fica}}^{\text{old}} - \frac{\text{FF}}{\rho_{\text{fuca}}}$$ [eq 14.3-3]

where $\rho_{\text{fuca}} = \rho_{\text{fuca}} \left( T_{\text{fuca}} \right)$ is the
theoretical fuel density.

By using Eq. (14.3-1), Eq. (14.3-2), and Eq. (14.3-3) in the cavity pressure
calculation of Eq. (14.2-39) and Eq. (14.2-40) and by dropping the superscripts
“old”, one obtains

$$\begin{split} P_{\text{ca}}^{\text{new}} = P_{\text{fvca}} + R_{\text{fi}} \cdot T_{\text{fuca}} \cdot \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fica}} - \text{FF} \cdot \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fica}}}{{\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}} \right) \\
 \big/ \left\{ \theta_{\text{ca}} - \theta_{\text{fuca}} + \frac{\text{FF}}{\rho_{\text{fuca}}\left( T \right)} + \left\lbrack \theta_{\text{fuca}} - \frac{\text{FF}}{\rho_{\text{fuca}}\left( T \right)} \right\rbrack K_{\text{fu}} \cdot \left( P_{\text{ca}}^{\text{new}} - P_{\text{fuca}} \right) \right\} \\\end{split}$$ [eq 14.3-4]

where

 $\theta_{\text{ca}} - \theta_{\text{fuca}} = \theta_{\text{fica}}$ 

By collecting the terms with FF on the left-hand side one obtains

$$\begin{split} \text{FF} \cdot \left\lbrack \frac{\left( P_{\text{ca}}^{\text{new}} - P_{\text{fvca}} \right)}{\rho_{\text{fuca}}} + \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fica}}}{{\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}} \cdot R_{\text{fi}} \cdot T_{\text{fuca}} \right. \\ \left.
 - \frac{K_{\text{fu}}}{\rho_{\text{fu}}} \cdot \left( P_{\text{ca}}^{\text{new}} - P_{\text{fvca}} \right)^{2} \right\rbrack = R_{\text{fi}} \cdot T_{\text{fuca}} \cdot {\rho'}_{\text{fica}} \\
 - \theta_{\text{fica}} \left( P_{\text{ca}}^{\text{new}} - P_{\text{fvca}} \right) - \theta_{\text{fica}} \cdot K_{\text{fu}} \cdot \left( P_{\text{ca}}^{\text{new}} - P_{\text{fvca}} \right)^{2}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.3-5]

This equation is used to calculate the fuel ejection FF for an
estimated $P_{\text{ca}}^{\text{new}}$ . FF is used, in turn, to
update the fission-gas and fuel densities in the channel node adjacent
to the ejecting cavity node. A new channel pressure is then calculated
based on the updated fuel and gas densities. The method of calculating
the channel pressures is discussed in Section 14.4.5. If the new channel
pressure is not within 1% of the estimated new cavity pressure, a better
estimate for the new cavity pressure is made and the calculational
sequence for the fuel and gas ejection is repeated.

Because the conditions in the coolant channel node can vary from normal
coolant flow to fully voided, the procedure of estimating the new cavity
pressure is somewhat complex. It has evolved through trial and error and
it usually leads to convergence in a few iterations. If the iteration
does not converge, it usually indicates that a non-physical condition
has developed in the pin or channel. When the axial extent of the
cladding rupture includes more numerical nodes as a result of axial pin
failure propagation (which is likely under LOF′d′TOP conditions), the
ejection calculation will be performed for each of the axial failure
nodes.

The ejection calculation from the pins was originally formulated to
allow a simultaneous ejection from the three pin failure groups at any
given axial location. As mentioned earlier, the second and third pin
failure groups are not yet operational. Because of the complexity of the
current ejection calculation from only one pin failure group, it is
expected that a simultaneous ejection from three pin failure groups into
the same coolant channel node may become too complicated. Therefore, a
simpler approach, which would only allow the ejection from the cavity
node with the highest pressure during a PLUTO2 time step, may have to be
adopted. In this approach it would, of course, still be possible for the
different pin failure groups to eject fuel simultaneously at different
axial locations.

The fuel and gas ejection calculation is done at the end of subroutine
PL1PIN which was discussed in Section 14.1.2. The ejection calculation
is done in the calculational sequence after all in-pin as well as
channel mass and energy conservation have been solved and before the
momentum equations for both the in-pin and channel flows are solved. The
ejection calculation thus provides updated pressures for the momentum
equations.

[anchor: axial-pin-failure-propagation]

## 14.3.3. Axial Pin Failure Propagation

Rapid axial pin failure propagation due to the stress concentrations at
the edges of the initial rupture (zipper-type failure propagation) has
not been accepted as a mechanism for rapid axial failure propagation
(i.e., on a millisecond or submillisecond time scale) [14-26]. However,
if the conditions in a fuel-pin node are such that failure of the
cladding should occur irrespective of cladding stress concentrations due
to an adjacent cladding rupture and whether the potential new failure
node location is adjacent to the initial failure or not, there is no
reason to disallow this type of failure propagation.

The failure of nodes other than the initial one is determined by PLUTO2
because the DEFORM calculation is not done in a calculational channel
once PLUTO2 (or LEVITATE) has been initiated. There are two options for
pin failure propagation in PLUTO2. The first option is a mechanistic one
based on the burst strength of the cladding. The second option allows
the pin failure propagation to proceed according to a combination of
input failure criteria based on fuel melt fraction, cladding
temperature, and pressure differential between cavity and channel.

The mechanistic option (KFAILP=0) assumes that the solid fuel
surrounding the molten cavity is completely cracked and that the radial
stress at the fuel-cladding interface can therefore be calculated by
reducing the cavity pressure by a geometrical reduction factor.

$$\sigma_{\text{radial,fc,K}} = \frac{P_{\text{ca,K}} \cdot D_{\text{ca,K}}}{\left( 2R_{\text{cl,fc,K}} \right)}$$ [eq 14.3-6]

where

 $R_{\text{cl,fc,K}}$ is the inner radius of the cladding at axial node
 $K$ .

 $D_{\text{ca,K}}$ is the diameter of the molten cavity at axial node $K$ .

The hoop stress in the cladding can be calculated from

$$\sigma_{\text{hoop,K}} = \left( \sigma_{\text{radial,fc,K}} - P_{\text{ch,i}} \right) \frac{R_{\text{cl,fc,K}}}{\Delta R_{\text{cl,K}}}$$ [eq 14.3-7]

where $\Delta R_{\text{cl,K}}$ is the cladding thickness at axial node $K$ ,
and subscript $i$ refers to the channel node which is adjacent to cavity
node $K$ ; $i = K + \text{IDIFF}$ where IDIFF is the number of channel
nodes below cavity node $K = 1$ .

By substituting Eq. (14.3-6) for the radial stress in Eq. (14.3-7),

$$\sigma_{\text{hoop,K}} = \frac{\left( P_{\text{ca,K}} \cdot D_{\text{ca,K}} - 2 \cdot P_{\text{ch,i}} \cdot R_{\text{cl,fc,K}} \right)}{\left( 2\Delta R_{\text{cl,K}} \right)}$$ [eq 14.3-8]

Failure is assumed to occur when the following two conditions are
satisfied:

$$\sigma_{\text{hoop,K}} > \sigma_{\text{UTS}} \left( T_{\text{cl,in,K}} \right)$$ [eq 14.3-9]

$$\text{AREA}_{\text{ca,K}} > \text{FNARME} \cdot \pi \cdot R_{\text{cl,fc,K}}^{2}$$ [eq 14.3-10]

where

FNARME = an input melt fraction (or more precisely cavity cross
sectional area divided by cross sectional area of the fuel) which should
be set to $\geq 0.2$ because the PLUTO2 in-point motion model requires a
moderately sized cavity diameter to run well.

 $\sigma_{\text{UTS}}$ = the burst strength of the cladding that is a function
of cladding temperature. This is calculated from the middle cladding
node temperature in function subroutine UTS, which is described in
Chapter 8 on fuel behavior.

A problem with this burst failure criterion is that it is not compatible
with a melt fraction failure criterion, cladding strain failure
criterion or any other criteria that are not directly related to the
cladding strength. Since these latter criteria may be used in DEFORM to
predict the initial failure, care has to be taken that the cladding will
not rip open along sizable length as soon as PLUTO2 takes over the
calculation. For example, this could happen if the initial pin failure
was assumed to occur due to a melt fraction criterion at a time when the
cavity pressure was already high enough to burst the cladding at several
axial elevations. If a melt fraction criterion was chosen for the
initial failure prediction, the problem that several nodes will
instantaneously rupture once PLUTO2 initiates, can be avoided by setting
the input parameter FNARME (see Eq. (14.3-10)) equal to or greater than
the input melt fraction criterion for the initial failure.

The non-mechanistic input failure propagation criterion (KFAILP=1)
involves several separate criteria. Failure occurs when the cladding
middle node and outer surface temperatures, the cross sectional area of
the cavity, and the pressure difference between cavity and channel
exceed input criteria.

$$\begin{aligned}
 T_{\text{cl,in,K}} && \text{and} && T_{\text{cl,os,K}} > \text{TEFAIL}
 \end{aligned}$$ [eq 14.3-11]

and

$$\text{AREA}_{\text{ca,K}} > \text{FNARME} \cdot \pi \cdot R_{\text{cl,fc,K}}^{2}$$ [eq 14.3-12]

and

$$P_{\text{ca,K}} > P_{\text{ch,i}} + \text{PRFAIL}$$ [eq 14.3-13]

where

TEFAIL, FNARME, and PRFAIL are input parameters.

Subscripts in and os refer to the middle and outer cladding nodes,
respectively. This combined criterion can of course be simplified by
setting some of the input values to extreme numbers. For example, if
TEFAIL is set to zero and PRFAIL to $-10^{20}$ , this criterion
will reduce to a pure melt fraction criterion. This input failure
propagation criterion may be useful for comparison calculations with
codes that allow failure propagation only according to one of the above
non-mechanistic criteria. Moreover, if the initial failure criterion is
a melt fraction criterion, one may also want to do the failure
propagation based on a melt fraction criterion or on a melt fraction
criterion combined with the condition that some overpressure has to
exist in the molten cavity nodes.

[anchor: complete-pin-disruption-and-switch-to-levitate]

## 14.3.4. Complete Pin Disruption and Switch to LEVITATE

Once the cladding has melted at a certain axial location and extensive
fuel melting has also occurred at the same location, complete fuel-pin
disruption will eventually occur. This cannot be treated with PLUTO2,
and therefore, a switch to LEVITATE is made under these conditions. For
each pin node, PLUTO2 checks whether the middle and outer cladding
temperatures have exceeded the liquidus and whether the fuel-surface
temperature has exceeded the solidus.

 $T_{\text{cl, in, K}} > T_{\text{cl, liq}}$ 

and

 $T_{\text{cl, os, K}} > T_{\text{cl, liq}}$ 

and

 $T_{\text{fu, os, K}} > T_{\text{fu,sol}}$ 

where

cl, in refers to the middle cladding node,

cl, os refers to the outer cladding node,

fu, os refers to the outermost fuel node.

If the above conditions are met, control will be transferred from PLUTO2
to LEVITATE. These checks are performed at the end of the PLUTO2 driver
routine. At that location in the code, it is also checked whether
cladding melting has occurred in more than NCPLEV nodes (NCPLEV is
input). If this criterion is met, a switch to LEVITATE will also occur.
Moreover, a switch to LEVITATE is also made if the fuel temperature in
the cavity or in the channel exceeds 4000 K because significant fuel
vapor pressures will develop beyond this temperature.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[page: Part04/Ch14/hydrodynamics.html]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[anchor: channel-hydrodynamics-model]

# 14.4. Channel Hydrodynamics Model

[anchor: overview-and-definition-of-generalized-smear-densities]

## 14.4.1. Overview and Definition of Generalized Smear Densities

The treatment of the material motion in the coolant channels is more
complex than that inside the pins because several material components
(fuel, sodium, fission gas) and three different phases (solid, liquid,
and gas) are involved. Of particular importance are the mass, energy and
momentum interactions between the components and phases of this
multi‑component, multi‑phase flow. These are largely determined by the
local fuel configurations, which are in turn determined by the fuel flow
regimes. Figure 14.4.1 depicts the possible fuel and liquid sodium
configurations in an equivalent cylindrical channel. The outer perimeter
of this equivalent cylindrical channel represents outer cladding
surfaces and inner subassembly wall surfaces. The fuel flow regimes are
extensively discussed in Section 14.4.3.1. Figure 14.4.2 gives an
overview of the interactions between the various channel components that
are described in detail in Section 14.4.3.4.

A one‑dimensional two‑fluid approach with variable flow cross section is
used to calculate the momentum changes in the coolant channels. This
means that two momentum conservation equations are solved. One of them
calculates the velocity changes of the mixture of liquid sodium, sodium
vapor, fission gas, and fuel vapor; the other calculates the velocity
changes of the moving liquid or solid fuel. This approach is taken
because the fuel‑to‑liquid sodium density ratio is more than 10, and a
relatively rapid separation of these two components is likely. This is
quite important for treating fuel coolant interactions (FCI’s) because
it may be one of the major limiting processes.

Figure 14.4.1 Illustration of the Possible Sodium and Fuel Flow Regimes as Well as the Fuel Freezing Patters in the PLUTO2 Model of the Coolant Channel

Figure 14.4.2 Table 14.4‑1. Overview of the Interaction Between the Channel Components in PLUTO2

There are four mass conservation equations for tracking moving
components in PLUTO2; (a) for liquid or solid fuel and for fuel
vapor [3], (b) for liquid sodium and sodium vapor, (c) for free fission
gas, and (d) for fission gas still dissolved in the fuel. There are also
mass conservation equations for the stationary fuel crust (i.e.,
plated‑out solid fuel) and for the stagnant sodium film.

A single energy conservation equation is solved for the mixture of
liquid sodium (including the stagnant sodium film), sodium vapor, and
free fission gas, which are all assumed to be in thermodynamic
equilibrium. An energy conservation equation is solved for the moving
solid fuel or for the two‑phase mixture of liquid fuel and fuel vapor.
The latter two are assumed to be in thermodynamic equilibrium in the
region where the fuel vapor pressure is larger than 10-2MPa.
Outside this region, no fuel vapor is considered. There is also an
energy equation for the solid fuel crusts.

The equation‑of‑state calculates the pressure for cells containing (a)
liquid‑phase sodium, (b) two‑phase sodium, two‑phase fuel and fission
gas, and (c) superheated vapor and fission gas.

Although Eulerian hydrodynamics is generally employed in the formulation
of the equations, a Lagrangian treatment is used to track the moving
upper and lower boundaries of the multiphase region. All finite
difference equations are written in conservative form. A staggered mesh
grid, with the velocities at the cell edges, and pressures, densities,
and temperatures at the cell centers, is used. The spatial derivatives
are evaluated by full donor cell differencing, which is also known as
second upwind differencing. This approach is more stable for very
non‑continuous conditions that are quite common in PLUTO2 applications
although this is not as accurate as higher order schemes [14‑30, 14‑31].

The time differencing is mainly explicit, but there are also important
implicit features involved. First, advantage is taken of the solution
sequence of the conservation equations. The results of the mass
conservation equations which are solved first, are used in the energy
conservation equations. The results of these two sets of conservation
equations and the results from the calculation of the fuel and gas
ejection from the pins are used in the equation‑of‑state and provide an
estimate of the channel pressure at the end of the time step. This is
then used in the solution of the momentum conservation equations.

Another implicit feature that is of key importance for a stable velocity
calculation of the lighter component is the simultaneous solution of the
two momentum equations. The lighter component can experience strong and
opposing pressure gradient and drag forces, which lead to oscillatory
behavior for low density mixtures if a simultaneous solution is not
performed [14‑32]. Also important is the implicit treatment of the
potentially large heat transfer between the various hot and cold
components.

The explicit aspect of the solution method is that the conservation
equations at different axial locations are not solved in a coupled
fashion. This means, for example, that a new velocity calculated at one
mesh cell boundary does not have an immediate effect on the new velocity
at the neighboring boundary. By not solving the equation sets
simultaneously, one can avoid three potential problems. First, an
iterative solution for the inversion of a complicated matrix, which can
have convergence problems or may require many iterations, can be
avoided. (A direct solution through Gaussian elimination does not seem
to be easily feasible for more than two coupled equation sets.) Second,
the later addition of certain terms to the equation set is relatively
straightforward for explicit schemes but can be complicated for implicit
schemes. Terms may have to be added to the equation set in order to make
a code such as PLUTO2 work for heretofore unforeseen conditions or
because the importance of additional terms may have to be investigated.
Third, the matrix elements of an implicit solution technique for
multi‑phase, multicomponent flows are usually complex and have no
direct physical meaning. Therefore, they can complicate the debugging of
such implicit solution schemes. However, a very stable implicit scheme
that would decrease the code running time and diminish the truncation
error introduced by the many time steps in an explicit scheme is
desirable. This may not be a practical goal for the solution of the
entire equation set in PLUTO2 but it would be a reasonable goal for
selected equations such as the mass and momentum conservations of the
light components.

Definition of the Generalized Smear Densities. A special feature of
the PLUTO2 module (and of the LEVITATE module) is the use of generalized
smear densities. This has been prompted by the presence of the many
different components and the simplification of the differential and
finite difference equations. The volume fractions are lumped together
with the physical densities of the materials and therefore do not appear
in the equations. Details about the smear densities in the fuel pin have
already been described in Section 14.2.5. The pie chart in Figure 14.4.3
gives an example of the relative cross sectional areas involved at a
certain axial location.

As discussed in Section 14.2.1, the same total cross sectional area of
the pie, which is an input value AXMX, is used at all axial locations of
the subassembly or the experimental loop considered. The relative sizes
of the pie pieces can vary at different axial locations; pieces such as
the pin piece can actually disappear at elevations above or below the
pin bundles. There is no empty piece in the pie if one assumes the total
area of the pie, AXMX, to be the total cross sectional area of a
subassembly or an experimental loop. However, at elevations where the
cross sectional area of the subassembly or the experimental loop is
smaller than AXMX, an empty pie piece is necessary.

Figure 14.4.3 The Right-hand Side of This Pie Chart Illustrate the Possible Material Cross Sectional areas in the Coolant Channel, the Whole Pie Representing an Area AXMX, which is an Input Parameter

The calculational results of the PLUTO2 module should not depend on the
choice of AXMX. This has been shown to be true as long as one does not
change AXMX by too many orders of magnitude. If one changes AXMX very
much, small differences in the results can occur due to differences in
truncation errors. Thus, the choice of the input value of AXMX is one of
convenience. The best choice for AXMX is usually the cross sectional
area of the entire subassembly including the hexcan wall at an axial
location where pins are present because this will lead to physically
meaningful values of the volume fraction. If one uses an AXMX different
from the above choice, the empty pie piece can become larger if a large
AXMX is chosen, or even negative if a relatively small AXMX is chosen.

The definition of a volume fraction of a certain component $k$ is:

$$\theta_{\text{k}} \left( z,t \right) = \frac{A_{\text{k}} \left( z,t \right)}{\text{AXMX}}$$ [eq 14.4-1]

where $A_{\text{k}}$ is the actual cross sectional area occupied by
component $k$ (e.g., all the cladding or all the frozen fuel) inside a
fuel assembly or inside the can wall of an experimental loop at axial
location $z$ and time $t$ . If AXMX was chosen to be the entire
subassembly cross section, the $\theta_{\text{k}}$ gives the actual volume
fraction of component $k$ in a slice of a subassembly or an experimental
loop. For all axial elevations,

$$\theta_{\text{pin}} \left( z \right) + \theta_{\text{sr}}\left( z \right) + \theta_{\text{ch}}\left( z \right) + \theta_{\text{empty}}\left( z \right) = 1$$ [eq 14.4-2]

where sr refers to structure material and ch to the coolant channel.
By appropriate choice of the input value AXMX, the $\theta_{\text{empty}}$ can
be made zero at most axial locations of concern. The volume fractions in
the above equation are functions of the axial position but independent
of time because no fuel-pin disintegration and no cladding motion,
cladding ablation or structure ablation are modeled in PLUTO2. These
phenomena are modeled in the LEVITATE module, which can take over the
PLUTO2 calculation when these phenomena come into play.

The following relations between the generalized volume fractions are
important for writing the channel hydrodynamics equations in PLUTO2:

$$\theta_{\text{ch}}\left( z \right) = \theta_{\text{ch,op}}\left( z,t \right) + \theta_{\text{ff}}\left( z,t \right)$$ [eq 14.4-3]

where

 $\theta_{\text{ch}}$ is the generalized coolant channel volume fraction which
is always equal to the values at pin failure in PLUTO2;

 $\theta_{\text{ch, op}}$ is the generalized volume fraction of the open
channel (i.e., the part of the channel available for the mobile
components);

 $\theta_{\text{ff}}$ is the generalized volume fraction of the frozen fuel
crusts;

$$\theta_{\text{ch,op}}\left( z,t \right) = \theta_{\text{fu}}\left( z,t \right) + \theta_{N1}\left( z,t \right) + \theta_{\text{vg}}\left( z,t \right)$$ [eq 14.4-4]

where

 $\theta_{\text{fu}}$ is the generalized volume fraction of the mobile liquid
or solid fuel in the channel;

 $\theta_{\text{N1}}$ is the generalized volume fraction of the liquid
sodium;

 $\theta_{\text{vg}}$ is the generalized volume fraction of the vapor/gas
(i.e., void) space in the channel;

$$\theta_{\text{N1}}\left( z,t \right) = \theta_{\text{N1,mv}}\left( z,t \right) + \theta_{\text{fm}}\left( z,t \right)$$ [eq 14.4-5]

where

 $\theta_{\text{N1, mv}}$ is the generalized volume fraction of the
moving liquid sodium;

 $\theta_{\text{fm}}$ is the generalized volume fraction of the liquid sodium
film.

The following generalized smear densities are defined:

$$\begin{split} {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}}\left( z,t \right) = \rho_{\text{fu}}\left( T \right) \theta_{\text{fu}}\left( z,t \right) + \rho_{\text{fv}}\left( T \right) \theta_{\text{vg}} \left( z,t \right) \\
 = \frac{\rho_{\text{fu}}\left( T \right) A_{\text{fu}}\left( z,t \right)}{\text{AXMX}} + \frac{\rho_{\text{fv}}\left( T \right) A_{\text{vg}}\left( z,t \right)}{\text{AXMX}}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-6]

where

 ${\rho'}_{\text{fuch}}$ is the generalized smear density of all the mobile
fuel (solid, liquid and vapor) in the channel;

 $\rho_{\text{fu}}$ is the theoretical density of the liquid or solid fuel;

 $\rho_{\text{fv}}$ is the physical fuel vapor density;

$${\rho'}_{\text{ff}} = \rho_{\text{ff}}\left( T \right) \theta_{\text{ff}}\left( z,t \right)$$ [eq 14.4-7]

where

 ${\rho'}_{\text{ff}}$ is the generalized smear density of the frozen fuel
crust.

$${\rho'}_{\text{Na}} = \rho_{\text{N1}}\left( T \right) \theta_{\text{N1}}\left( z,t \right) + \rho_{\text{Nv}} \left( T \right) \theta_{\text{vg}}\left( z,t \right)$$ [eq 14.4-8]

where

 ${\rho'}_{\text{Na}}$ is the generalized smear density of all the sodium
(moving liquid, stationary liquid film, and vapor).

$${\rho'}_{\text{Nm}} = {\rho'}_{\text{Na}} - \rho_{\text{N1}}\left( T \right) \theta_{\text{fm}}\left( z,t \right)$$ [eq 14.4-9]

where

 ${\rho'}_{\text{Nm}}$ is the generalized smear density of the sodium vapor
and the mobile liquid sodium.

$${\rho'}_{\text{fi}} = \rho_{\text{fi}}\left( T,p \right) \theta_{\text{vg}}\left( z,t \right)$$ [eq 14.4-10]

where

 ${\rho'}_{\text{fi}}$ is the generalized smear density of the free fission
gas in the channel.

$${\rho'}_{\text{fv}} = \rho_{\text{fv}}\left( T,p \right) \theta_{\text{vg}}\left( z,t \right)$$ [eq 14.4-11]

where

 ${\rho'}_{\text{fv}}$ is the generalized smear density of the fuel vapor
in the channel.

$${\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} = {\rho'}_{\text{Nm}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fi}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fv}}$$ [eq 14.4-12]

where

 ${\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}$ is the total generalized smear density of all moving
“light components” (liquid sodium, sodium vapor, free fission gas, and
fuel vapor).

$${\rho'}_{\text{fs}} = \rho_{\text{fs}} \theta_{\text{fu}}\left( z,t \right)$$ [eq 14.4-13]

where

 ${\rho'}_{\text{fs}}$ is the generalized smear density of the dissolved
fission gas in the moving liquid or solid fuel.

All the variables and subscripts are described in the list of symbols at
the beginning of Chapter 14. The subscript ch, op requires some
additional explanation. It designates the open channel cross section
which is occupied by the moving materials in the channel including the
sodium film. The basic definition of $\theta_{\text{ch,op}}$ will become
clearer if one rewrites Eq. (14.4-3) with $\theta_{\text{ch,op}}$ on the
left-hand side of the equation.

In Eq. (14.4-6), the definition of the volume fractions, which is given in
Eq. (14.4-1), is used to rewrite the right-hand side of this equation. The
initial forms of the conservation equations described in the following
sub-sections contain products of the physical densities and the
cross-sectional areas associated with each component. After dividing
these equations by AXMX, one can make use of the above definitions for
the volume fractions and generalized linear densities to simplify the
conservation equations.

For the generalized source or sink terms,

$${S'} = \frac{S^{l}}{\text{AXMX}}$$ [eq 14.4-14]

where the source or sink terms $S^{l}$ are the mass
sources and sinks per unit time and per unit length.

[anchor: mass-conservation-for-fuel-sodium-and-free-and-dissolved-fission-gas]

## 14.4.2. Mass Conservation for Fuel, Sodium, and Free and Dissolved Fission-gas

[anchor: moving-components-differential-equation]

### 14.4.2.1. Moving Components: Differential Equation

[anchor: fuel-and-fuel-vapor-mass-conservation]

#### 14.4.2.1.1. Fuel and Fuel Vapor Mass Conservation

The differential equation for the mass conservation of all the moving
fuel, including fuel $\text{vapor}^{*}$ [4] is:

$$\begin{split}\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}} \left( \rho_{\text{fu}} A_{\text{fu}} + \rho_{\text{fv}} A_{\text{vg}} \right) + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( \rho_{\text{fu}} A_{\text{fu}} u_{\text{fu}} + \rho_{\text{fv}} A_{\text{vg}} u_{\text{Mi}} \right) \\
= \left( S_{\text{fu,ej}}^{l} + S_{\text{fu,me}}^{l} - S_{\text{fu,ff}}^{l} \right)\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-15]

where the source terms denoted by $S^{l}$ are the mass
sources and sinks per unit time and per unit length. The source term due
to fuel ejection has been discussed in Section 14.3. The source and sink
terms due to fuel freeze-out and frozen fuel remelting, respectively,
will be discussed in Section 14.4.3.2.

By dividing the above mass conservation equation by AXMX and by using
the definitions for the generalized volume fractions and smear densities
one arrives at:

$$\begin{split}\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}} {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} u_{\text{fu}} \right) + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fv}} u_{\text{Mi}} \right) - \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fv}}u_{\text{fu}} \right) \\
= {S'}_{\text{fu,ej}} + {S'}_{\text{fu,me}} - {S'}_{\text{fu,ff}}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-16]

where

$${\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} = {\rho'}_{\text{fu}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fv}}$$ [eq 14.4-17]

is the total generalized mobile fuel smear density in the channel
including solid and liquid fuel and fuel vapor. The primed source and
sink terms represent the mass sources and sinks per unit time and unit
volume. The latter is a m3 of the cell volume $\text{AXMX} \cdot \Delta z$ 
in which all components (including pin, structure and channel
components) are assumed to be uniformly smeared.

Fuel vapor streaming into regions with no fuel or with fuel which is not
generating significant fuel vapor pressure (i.e., less than
10-2 MPa) is not currently considered in PLUTO2.

[anchor: dissolved-fission-gas-mass-conservation]

#### 14.4.2.1.2. Dissolved Fission-gas Mass Conservation

The mass conservation for the dissolved fission gas (or matrix fission
gas) in the moving liquid or solid fuel reads:

$$\begin{split} \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}\left( \rho_{\text{fs}}A_{\text{fu}} \right) + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( \rho_{\text{fs}}A_{\text{fu}}u_{\text{fu}} \right) = \left\lbrack \left( S_{\text{fu,ej}}^{l} \rho_{\text{fsca}} A_{\text{fuca}} \right) \right. \\ \left.
 \big/ \left( \rho_{\text{fuca}}A_{\text{fuca}} \right) - \frac{\left( S_{\text{fu,ff}}^{l} \rho_{\text{fs}} A_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\left( \rho_{\text{fu}}A_{\text{fu}} \right)} - S_{\text{fs,rl}}^{l} \right\rbrack\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-18]

where the fuel mass sources $S_{\text{fu, ej}}^{l}$ and
 $S_{\text{fu, ff}}^{l}$ have been
multiplied by the dissolved gas-to-fuel mass ratios in the molten pin
cavity and in the channel, respectively, to obtain the dissolved gas
sources. The areas and densities with the subscripts fsca and fuca
are for the molten pin cavity. The sink term
 $S_{\text{fs, rl}}^{l}$ is the rate of dissolved
fission-gas release. Its generalized form is described in Eq. (14.4-20).
By dividing Eq. (14.4-18) by AXMX and by using the definitions for the
generalized smear densities, one arrives at:

$$\begin{split} \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}{\rho'}_{\text{fs}} + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}{\rho'}_{\text{fs}}u_{\text{fu}} = \left\lbrack \frac{\left( {S'}_{\text{fu,ej}} {\rho'}_{\text{fsca}} \right)}{{\rho'}_{\text{fuca}}} \right. \\ \left.
 - \frac{\left( {S'}_{\text{fu,ff}} {\rho'}_{\text{fs}} \right)}{{\rho'}_{\text{fu}}} - {S'}_{\text{fs,rl}} \right\rbrack\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-19]

$$\begin{split} {S'}_{\text{fs,rl}} = \begin{cases}
 {\rho'}_{\text{fs}} \cdot \text{CIRTFS} & \text{for } T_{\text{fu}} > T_{\text{fu,sol}} \\
 0 & \text{for } T_{\text{fu}} < T_{\text{fu,sol}} \\
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-20]

where CIRTFS is a dissolved gas release time constant which is input
and has the dimensions s-1. The same gas release time
constant is used for releasing the dissolved gas in the molten pin
cavity (see Section 14.2.6).

[anchor: two-phase-sodium-mass-conservation]

#### 14.4.2.1.3. Two-phase Sodium Mass Conservation

The mass conservation equation of the sodium liquid and vapor including
the sodium film is given by

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}\left( \rho_{\text{Na}} A_{\text{ch}} \right) + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( \rho_{\text{Nm,ch}} A_{\text{Nm}} u_{\text{Mi}} \right) = 0$$ [eq 14.4-21]

where

 $\rho_{\text{Na}}$ is the total sodium smear density, including the sodium
films, in the channel. Note that this is not a generalized smear
density.

 $\rho_{\text{Nm,ch}}$ is the smear density of the mobile sodium referring to
the cross section $A_{\text{Nm}}$ of the moving sodium mixture.

$$A_{\text{Nm}} = A_{\text{ch}} - A_{\text{Na,fm}} - A_{\text{fu}} - A_{\text{ff}}$$ [eq 14.4-22]

where

 $A_{\text{ch}}$ is the cross sectional area of the channel;

 $A_{\text{Na,fm}}$ is the cross sectional area of the liquid Na films;

 $A_{\text{ff}}$ is the cross sectional area of frozen fuel.

By dividing the mass conservation Eq. (14.4-21) by AXMX and using the
definitions for the generalized smear densities, one obtains:

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}{\rho'}_{\text{Na}} + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}{\rho'}_{\text{Nm,ch}} u_{\text{Mi}} = 0$$ [eq 14.4-23]

where

$${\rho'}_{\text{Nm,ch}} = {\rho'}_{\text{Na}} - \rho_{\text{N}l} \theta_{\text{fm}}$$ [eq 14.4-24]

The calculation of the volume fraction of the sodium film,
 $\theta_{\text{fm}}$ , considers vapor condensation, film evaporation and film
entrainment. This is described in Section 14.4.2.2.

[anchor: free-fission-gas-mass-conservation]

#### 14.4.2.1.4. Free Fission-gas Mass Conservation

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}\left( \rho_{\text{fi}} A_{\text{vg}} \right) + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( \rho_{\text{fi}}A_{\text{vg}}u_{\text{Mi}} \right) = \left( S_{\text{fi,ej}}^{l} + S_{\text{fs,rl}}^{l} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-25]

where the two source terms are due to fission-gas ejection from the fuel
pins and due to the release of fission gas dissolved in the fuel. The
rate of fuel ejection from the pins is described in Section 14.3. The
release of the dissolved fission gas is described in Eq. (14.4-20).
Dividing by AXMX and using the generalized smear density definitions,
one obtains:

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}{\rho'}_{\text{fi}} + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}{\rho'}_{\text{fi}} u_{\text{Mi}} = {S'}_{\text{fi,ej}} + {S'}_{\text{fs,rl}}$$ [eq 14.4-26]

[anchor: finite-difference-forms-of-the-mass-conservations-and-subroutine-plmaco]

### 14.4.2.2. Finite Difference Forms of the Mass Conservations and Subroutine PLMACO

For the free fission gas and the dissolved fission gas, the form of the
differential mass conservation is:

$$\frac{\partial{\rho'}_{\text{k}}}{\partial \text{t}} + \frac{\partial\left( {\rho'}_{\text{k}} u_{\text{k}} \right)}{\partial \text{z}} = \sum_{\text{n}}{S_{\text{k,n}}}$$ [eq 14.4-27]

where $k$ designates a specific component and n the different types of
source or sink terms for this component.

For the numerical solution of these equations, a staggered mesh with the
velocities at the edges and the densities at the mesh centers is used
(on the numerical grid, which is actually used in the code, the half
indices have to be avoided; see later in this section).

By spatially integrating over the control volume for
 $z_{\text{i-1/2}}$ to $z_{\text{i+1/2}}$ one obtains

$$\frac{\partial{\rho'}_{\text{k,i}}}{\partial \text{t}}\Delta z_{\text{i}} + \left\lbrack \left( {\rho'} u \right)_{\text{k,i+1/2}} - \left( {\rho'} u \right)_{\text{k,i-1/2}} \right\rbrack = \sum_{\text{n}}{{S'}_{\text{k,n,i}} \Delta z_{\text{i}}}$$ [eq 14.4-28]

By performing the time integration over the length of the time step,
 $\Delta t$ , we obtain:

$${\rho'}_{\text{k,i}}^{n + 1} = {\rho'}_{\text{k,j}}^{n} - \left\lbrack \left( {\rho'} u \right)_{\text{k,i+1/2}} - \left( {\rho'} u \right)_{\text{k,i-1/2}} \right\rbrack \frac{\Delta t}{\Delta z_{\text{i}}} + \sum_{\text{n}}{{S'}_{\text{k,n,i}} \cdot \Delta t}$$ [eq 14.4-29]

It should be noted that this finite difference form of mass conservation
is in a conservation form that prevents any mass losses. It should be
noted that this mass conservation actually includes a variable flow
cross-section treatment because the primed generalized smear densities
include the flow cross-section areas.

Full donor cell differencing is used for evaluating the convective
fluxes. Although this is not as accurate as higher order approaches, it
tends to increase the stability of the solution [14-30, 14-31]. This is
important because of the very complicated flow condition which can be
encountered in PLUTO2 calculations. The convective terms in Eq. (14.4-29)
are calculated in the following manner:

$$\begin{split} \left( {\rho'} u \right)_{\text{k,i+1/2}} = \begin{cases}
 {\rho'}_{\text{k,i}} u_{\text{k,i+1/2}} & \text{if } u_{\text{k,i+1/2}} > 0 \\
 {\rho'}_{\text{k,i+1}} u_{\text{k,i+1/2}} & \text{if } u_{\text{k,i+1/2}} < 0 \\
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-30]

$$\begin{split} \left( {\rho'} u \right)_{\text{k,i-1/2}} = \begin{cases}
 {\rho'}_{\text{k,i}} u_{\text{k,i-1/2}} & \text{if } u_{\text{k,i-1/2}} > 0 \\
 {\rho'}_{\text{k,i+1}} u_{\text{k,i-1/2}} & \text{if } u_{\text{k,i-1/2}} < 0 \\
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-31]

In the above equations, half indices are used that can be located on the
previous schematic of the mesh grid. However, since half indices cannot
be used in a computer program, the indices used in the code are arranged
on the numerical grid as follows:

When using FORTRAN variable names, the convective flux for the free
fission gas at $i-1/2$ is therefore:

$$\begin{split} \text{COFICH}\left( I \right) = \begin{cases}
\text{DEFICH}\left( I - 1 \right) \cdot \text{UMCH} \left( I \right) & \text{if }\text{UMCH}\left( I \right) > 0 \\
\text{DEFICH}\left( I \right) \cdot \text{UMCH} \left( I \right) & \text{if }\text{UMCH}\left( I \right) < 0 \\
\end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-32]

The convective fluxes are set to zero at the edges of the component
domains. The location of the upper and lower interfaces of each
component domain is calculated in PLUTO2. The integers designating the
lowermost and uppermost nodes containing free fission gas are designated
IFFIBT and IFFITP, respectively, and the convective fluxes are set to
zero at these locations:

$$\text{COFICH} \left( \text{IFFIBT} \right) = 0$$ [eq 14.4-33]

$$\text{COFICH} \left( \text{IFFITP} + 1 \right) = 0$$ [eq 14.4-34]

Eq. (14.4-15) is the fuel mass conservation in differential form. It can
be rearranged to give

$$\begin{split} \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}{\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left\lbrack \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} - {\rho'}_{\text{fv}} \right) u_{\text{fu}} \right\rbrack + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fv}} u_{\text{Mi}} \right) \\
 = {S'}_{\text{fu,ej}} + {S'}_{\text{fu,me}} - {S'}_{\text{fu,ff}}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-35]

By integrating over $\Delta z_{\text{i}}$ and $\Delta t$ , one obtains:

$$\begin{split} {\rho'}_{\text{fuch,i}}^{n + 1} = {\rho'}_{\text{fuch,j}}^{n} - \left\{ \left\lbrack \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} - {\rho'}_{\text{fv}} \right) u_{\text{fu}} \right\rbrack_{\text{i+1/2}} - \left\lbrack \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} - {\rho'}_{\text{fv}} \right) u_{\text{fu}} \right\rbrack_{\text{i-1/2}} \right. \\ \left.
 + \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fv}} u_{\text{Mi}} \right)_{\text{i+1/2}} - \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fv}} u_{\text{Mi}} \right)_{\text{i-1/2}} \right\} \frac{\Delta t}{\Delta z_{\text{i}}} \\
 + \left\lbrack {S'}_{\text{fu,ej,i}} + {S'}_{\text{fu,me,i}} - {S'}_{\text{fu,ff,i}} \right\rbrack \Delta t\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-36]

In the code, the convective flux term
 $\left\lbrack \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} - {\rho'}_{\text{fv}} \right) u_{\text{fu}} \right\rbrack_{\text{i-1/2}}$ is
written as:

$$\begin{split} \text{COFUCH}\left( I \right) = \begin{cases}
 \left\lbrack \text{DEFUCH}\left( I - 1 \right) - \text{DEFVCH} \left( I - 1 \right) \right\rbrack \cdot \text{UFCH} \left( I \right) & \text{if } \text{UFCH}\left( I \right) > 0 \\
 \left\lbrack \text{DEFUCH}\left( I \right) - \text{DEFVCH} \left( I \right) \right\rbrack \cdot \text{UFCH}\left( I \right) & \text{if } \text{UFCH}\left( I \right) < 0 \\
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-37]

The two-phase sodium mass conservation equation, Eq. (14.4-23), includes
the generalized smear density of the moving mixture in the convective
term and not the total sodium smear density which includes the sodium
film. The value of the density is evaluated according to Eq. (14.4-24).
When using the FORTRAN variable names, the convective flux at the
boundary $i-1/2$ is:

$$\begin{split} \text{CONACH}\left( I \right) = \begin{cases}
 \left\lbrack \text{DENMCH}\left( I - 1 \right) \right\rbrack \cdot \text{UMCH}\left( I \right) & \text{if } \text{UMCH}\left( I \right) > 0 \\
 \left\lbrack \text{DENMCH}\left( I \right) \right\rbrack \cdot \text{UMCH}\left( I \right) & \text{if } \text{UMCH}\left( I \right) < 0 \\
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-38]

All of the above mass conservation equations are solved in subroutine
PLMACO (PLUTO2 MASS CONSERVATION). However, sink or source
terms related to fuel plateout and frozen fuel crust release are
considered earlier in the calculational sequence in subroutine PLFREZ.
Fuel and fission-gas ejection terms are considered later when subroutine
PL1PIN, which calculates these terms, is called. Besides solving the
mass conservation equations, PLMACO also contains a special treatment
for the numerical cells at the bottom and top of the channel, which
comes into play only when the interaction zone extends to the
subassembly inlet or outlet. For example if the interaction zone has
reached the subassembly outlet and if the pressure in the top node is
larger than the outlet pressure, appropriate amounts of fuel, sodium and
fission gas are taken out of the top nodes in order to reduce the
pressure to the outlet pressure. The same procedure is performed for the
inlet node if the interaction zone extends into it. The total component
masses taken out of the end nodes are shown in the PLUTO2 output.

[anchor: determination-of-the-axial-extent-of-the-component-regions-in-subroutine-plif-and-mesh-rezoning-in-subroutine-plrezo]

### 14.4.2.3. Determination of the Axial Extent of the Component Regions in Subroutine PLIF and Mesh Rezoning in Subroutine PLREZO

Before the above mass conservation equations are solved in subroutine
PLMACO, the axial extent of the different component regions has to be
determined. In subroutine PLIF (PLUTO2 INTERFACE), the interface
locations of the interaction region are reset (the velocity calculations
of the liquid sodium slugs above and below this region, which determine
the interface velocities, are actually done later in the sequence in
PLMOCO). The resetting of the interaction zone interface locations is
not quite straightforward because the sodium slugs leave a liquid sodium
film behind on the cladding and structure when the interaction zone
expands. Because the dynamic slug calculation in PLMOCO is done for the
entire channel cross section area, the interface displacement is
increased by a factor of 1/(1 ‑ liquid film cross section/channel cross
section). This conserves the sodium voiding calculated for the entire
cross section. For a sodium slug reentering over an existing film the
slug interface displacement is increased by multiplying by (1 + liquid
film cross section/channel cross section). PLIF also resets the lower
and upper interface locations of the fuel region which can be inside
the interaction region or at the interaction zone boundaries. If the
latter are being penetrated by the fuel, they are set to the fuel
interfaces in subroutine PLREZO, as discussed below (the actual
velocity calculation of the fuel interfaces is done in PLMOCO).
Furthermore, the upper and lower interface locations of both the free
fission gas and the fuel vapor region are calculated in the subroutine
PLIF (these interfaces can also be at the edges of the interaction
region or inside it; the velocities of these interfaces are assumed to
be equal to the local sodium/fission gas/fuel vapor mixture velocities).
Besides calculating the extent of the component regions, the subroutine
PLIF also calculates the axial fuel‑pin failure propagation (see Section 14.3). If the fuel pins fail into the liquid sodium slugs outside the
interaction zone, the interaction zone is enlarged in subroutine PLREZO.
This is discussed below.

In subroutine PLREZO (PLUTO2 REZONE), mesh cells are added to an
expanding interaction region or deleted from a shrinking interaction
region. In the schematic below it is shown that the end cells of the
interaction region can be shorter or longer than the regular cell
lengths. The small cell 6 in the schematic exists because L1 is greater
than the input value DZPLIN, which has to be shorter than any regular
mesh cell used in a given calculation. Cell 9 is larger than the regular
cell length at this location because it has not yet extended enough into
cell 10 (L2 < DZPLIN). Creating a new cell or collapsing a small cell
with a neighboring one is a complicated procedure because it requires
redistributing liquid sodium and fission gas in a manner that no
significant pressure disturbances are introduced. The SAS4A reactivity
calculation refers only to the regular mesh grid and not the Lagrangian
edge cells. The material in a particular cell grid such as cell No. 6 is
assumed to be homogeneously mixed with the liquid sodium sluglet to the
left of it for the reactivity calculation. The materials in the section
L2 of cell 9 are assumed to be homogeneously mixed with cell 10 for the
reactivity calculation.

Subroutine PLREZO also expands the interaction zone when fuel penetrates
the liquid sodium slugs. The liquid sodium that has been penetrated by
the fuel is added to the edge cell and homogeneously distributed into
it.

PLREZO also has the following treatment for slug interfaces (with the
interaction region) crossing into cells that contain frozen fuel crusts
or cells into which fuel can be ejected from adjacent ruptured fuel pin
nodes: the liquid sodium that has crossed into such a cell is
homogeneously distributed in it and the slug interface location is reset
to the edge of the cell containing frozen fuel or the ejection cell,
respectively.

[anchor: stationary-sodium-films-and-subroutine-plvofr]

### 14.4.2.4. Stationary Sodium Films and Subroutine PLVOFR

The liquid sodium films that are left behind by the ejected coolant
slugs are of importance for keeping the cladding cool in voided regions
of the coolant channel. Moreover, when fuel moves into voided regions
in which a liquid sodium film is still present, the fuel‑to‑liquid
sodium heat transfer will increase the liquid sodium evaporation, and
thus the sodium vapor pressure.

In PLUTO2, the liquid sodium film is assumed to be stationary. It can
become thinner due to sodium evaporation or to entrainment caused by the
drag from the moving vapor/gas/sodium droplet/fuel particle mixture.
Once an annular fuel flow regime develops in a coolant channel node,
the entire sodium film in that node is added to the moving
vapor/gas/sodium droplet flow (This assumption should be further
investigated). Liquid sodium films can grow due to sodium vapor
condensation and sodium droplet de‑entrainment, i.e., deposition on the
film. However, the maximum thickness of the liquid film cannot be larger
than the initial film thickness, which is determined by the input
liquid film fraction CINAFO.

The evaporation of, or the condensation on, the liquid sodium film is
taken into account in the sodium energy equation and contributes to the
change of the liquid sodium fraction in a numerical cell. Once the
liquid sodium fraction is below the input film fraction, the sodium film
fraction will approach and eventually be equal to the current liquid
fraction if the node considered is in the de‑entrainment mode. If the
sodium film is being entrained, the sodium film thickness is determined
by this mechanism.

In order to determine whether sodium entrainment or de‑entrainment
occurs, the superficial velocity (i.e., the volumetric flux divided by
the entire channel cross section) of the fission‑gas/two‑phase
sodium/fuel particle mixture has to be evaluated. The following momentum
averaging suggested by Ishii [14‑58] is performed to arrive at an
average velocity of all the moving components:

$$\overline{u}_{\text{Mi,fu}} = \left\{ \frac{\left| \left( \text{CIETFU} \cdot \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fu}}}{\theta_{\text{ch}}} \cdot u_{\text{fu}} \left| u_{\text{fu}} \right| + \
 \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{\theta_{\text{ch}}} \cdot u_{\text{Mi}} \left| u_{\text{Mi}} \right| \right) \right|}{\left( \text{CIETFU} \cdot \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fu}}}{\theta_{\text{ch}}} \
 + \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{\theta_{\text{ch}}} \right)} \right\}^{1/2}$$ [eq 14.4-39]

where CIETFU is an input value which can be between zero and one. This
input variable has been introduced because of the uncertainty about the
influence of the fuel particles on the entrainment of the film. If one
assumes that the fuel particle mass can be smeared over the entraining
mixture cross section and that it would act like a dense gas, $\text{CIETFU} = 1.0$ 
has to be chosen. If one assumes that the fuel particles are less
efficient in entraining the film, a lower value should be used. A value
of 0.1 is recommended because it was used successfully in experiment
analyses of TREAT tests L8 and H6 [14‑15, 14‑12].

The entrainment limit $u_{\text{et,min}}$ used in the code is based on a
correlation given in Reference [14‑33, 14‑34] for the inception of
entrainment of a rough turbulent film flow:

$$\begin{split} u_{\text{et,min}} = \begin{cases}
 \text{VCONST}^{0.8} \cdot \frac{\sigma_{\text{N1}}}{\mu_{\text{N1}}} \cdot \sqrt{\frac{\rho_{\text{N1}}}{\rho_{mi,fu}}} & \text{if } \text{VCONST} < 1/15 \\
 0.1146 \cdot \frac{\sigma_{\text{N1}}}{\mu_{\text{N1}}} \cdot \sqrt{\frac{\rho_{\text{N1}}}{\rho_{\text{mi,fu}}}} & \text{if } \text{VCONST} > 1/15 \\
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-40]

where the viscosity number VCONST is defined by

$$\text{VCONST} = \frac{\mu_{\text{N1}}}{\left\{ \rho_{\text{N1}} \sigma_{\text{N1}} \left\lbrack \frac{\sigma_{\text{N1}}}{\left( g \cdot \left( \rho_{\text{N1}} - \rho_{\text{Mi,fu}} \right) \right)} \right\rbrack^{1/2} \right\}^{1/2}}$$ [eq 14.4-41]

 $\mu_{\text{Nl}}$ = viscosity of liquid sodium

 $\sigma_{\text{N1}}$ = surface tension of liquid sodium

 $\rho_{\text{N1}}$ = density of liquid sodium

 $\rho_{\text{Mi,fu}} = \text{CIETFU} \cdot \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fu}}}{\theta_{\text{ch}}} + \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{\theta_{\text{ch}}}$ 

In the entrainment mode:

$$\left| \overline{u}_{\text{Mi,fu}} \right| > u_{\text{et,min}}$$ [eq 14.4-42]

The amount of sodium film entrained is computed using the following
equation.

$$\theta_{\text{Mi,fu}}^{\text{new}} = \theta_{\text{fm}}^{\text{old}} - \frac{\text{CINAFO} \cdot \theta_{\text{ch,op}} \cdot \Delta t_{\text{PL}}}{5 \text{ ms}}$$ [eq 14.4-43]

where

 $\text{CINAFO} \cdot \theta_{\text{ch,op}}$ = initial and maximum liquid sodium film generalized
volume fraction (CINAFO is input);

 $\Delta t_{\text{PL}} \big/ \left( 5 \text{ ms} \right)$ = fraction of the initial and maximum film volume
fraction which is entrained during a PLUTO2 time step.

The entrainment time constant of 5 milliseconds will lead to a complete
entrainment of the liquid film in 5 milliseconds if the mixture
velocity stays above the entrainment limit during that time. Since the
entrained liquid sodium droplets are assumed to be instantaneously in
velocity equilibrium with the moving mixture, the velocity of the latter
can decrease due to the entrainment. This may temporarily lead to a
de‑entrainment period, which is characterized by:

$${\overline{u}}_{\text{Mi,fu}} < u_{\text{et, min}}$$

and

$$\theta_{\text{fm}}^{\text{new}} = \theta_{\text{fm}}^{\text{old}} + \frac{\text{CINAFO} \cdot \theta_{\text{ch,op}} \cdot \Delta t_{\text{PL}}}{5 \text{ ms}}$$ [eq 14.4-44]

Subroutine PLVOFR. Subroutine PLVOFR (PLUTO2 VOLUME
FRACTIONS) calculates the sodium entrainment/de‑entrainment
discussed above. Two other tasks are performed in this routine. One is
concerned with the setting of most channel volume fractions and the
other with the selection of the fuel flow regimes. The latter will be
discussed in the next section.

Since PLVOFR is called after PLMACO and PLFREZ, the volume fractions
calculated in PLVOFR already reflect the component mass changes due to
convection and due to fuel plateout and fuel crust release. Volume
fractions set in this routine include the moving fuel volume fraction
 $\theta_{\text{fu}}$ , the volume fraction of the open channel
 $\theta_{\text{ch,op}} = \theta_{\text{ch}} - \theta_{\text{ff}}$ , the liquid sodium
volume fraction $\theta_{\text{Nl}}$ , the vapor/gas volume fraction
when the liquid sodium is assumed to be uncompressed $\theta_{\text{vg,un}}$ ,
the vapor/gas volume fraction for properly compressed liquid sodium
 $\theta_{\text{vg}}$ , and also the sodium film volume fraction $\theta_{\text{fm}}$ 
as discussed above. Moreover, the sodium quality is calculated in this
routine. It is based on the following definition:

$$\frac{1}{\rho_{\text{Na}}} = \frac{x_{\text{Na}}}{\rho_{\text{Nv}}} + \frac{\left( 1 - x_{\text{Na}} \right)}{\rho_{\text{N1}}}$$ [eq 14.4-45]

The last equation can be solved for $x_{\text{Na}}$ :

$$x_{\text{Na}} = \frac{\left( \rho_{\text{N1}} - \rho_{\text{Na}} \right) \cdot \rho_{\text{Nv}}}{\left( \rho_{\text{N1}} - \rho_{\text{Nv}} \right) \cdot \rho_{\text{Na}}}$$ [eq 14.4-46]

where

$$\rho_{\text{Na}} = \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{Na}}}{\left( \theta_{\text{ch,op}} - \theta_{\text{fu}} \right)}$$

The sodium void fraction is also set in PLVOFR. It is based on the
definition

$$\rho_{\text{Na}} = \alpha_{\text{Na}} \rho_{\text{Nv}} + \left( 1 - \alpha_{\text{Na}} \right) \rho_{\text{N1}}$$ [eq 14.4-47]

This leads to

$$\alpha_{\text{Na}} = \frac{\left( \rho_{\text{N1}} - \rho_{\text{Na}} \right)}{\left( \rho_{\text{N1}} - \rho_{\text{Nv}} \right)}$$ [eq 14.4-48]

The volume fraction of the vapor/gas mixture for the case of
uncompressed liquid sodium is

$$\theta_{\text{vg,un}} = \left( \theta_{\text{ch,op}} - \theta_{\text{fu}} \right) \cdot \alpha_{\text{Na}}$$ [eq 14.4-49]

The gas/vapor volume fraction for compressed liquid sodium is

$$\theta_{\text{vg}} = \theta_{\text{vg,un}} + K_{\text{N1}} \cdot \theta_{\text{N1}} \cdot \left( P_{\text{ch}} - P_{\text{Nv}} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-50]

where

 $K_{\text{N1}} = \text{CMNL}$ which is a single input value for the
isothermal liquid sodium compressibility.

The $\theta_{\text{vg}}$ calculated in this routine is not allowed to be
smaller than $\frac{\theta_{\text{ch,op}}}{1000}$ . This is done because $\theta_{\text{vg}}$ 
is used in the denominator of certain interaction terms. Later in the
fission-gas pressure calculation in subroutine PLNAEN, the
 $\theta_{\text{vg}}$ is implicitly used without the above-mentioned
restriction.

[anchor: fuel-flow-regimes-fuel-plateout-and-frozen-crust-release-platedout-and-moving-fuel-configurations-and-energy-and-momentum-exchange-terms]

## 14.4.3. Fuel Flow Regimes, Fuel Plateout and Frozen Crust Release, Plated‑out and Moving Fuel Configurations, and Energy and Momentum Exchange Terms

[anchor: fuel-flow-regimes]

### 14.4.3.1. Fuel Flow Regimes

Based on the evidence from TREAT TOP experiments, only a fraction of the
fuel ejected into the coolant channels fragments into particles or
droplets that get rapidly swept upwards. The other fuel does not break
up but moves in the channels in the form of a continuous flow that tends
to plate out on the cladding and structure upon freezing. Particulate
debris with only little plated‑out fuel was found in TOP tests R12
[14‑35] and J1 [14‑25] in which the power transients were cut soon after
the first indication of pin failure. This suggests that the fuel that is
ejected first from the pins and contacts liquid sodium tends to break
up. The fuel that is ejected later into a locally voided channel tends
to stay together although liquid sodium reentering from below can cause
a delayed fragmentation. This was concluded from the analysis of TREAT
test H4 [14‑37, 14‑36].

The CAMEL out‑of‑pile tests [14‑38, 14‑39] also show rapid particulate
fuel sweepout. The fuel that does not fragment tends to plate out very
close to the fuel ejection site in these out‑of‑pile tests. The regions
with plated-out fuel found in the post‑test examination of most TREAT
TOP tests, however, extend considerably above the cladding failure site.
This indicates the temporary existence of a continuous fuel flow in
TREAT experiments. The likely reasons why the plated‑out fuel does not
extend further upwards in CAMEL tests are (a) the lack of continued
fission heating of the fuel in these out‑of‑pile tests, (b) the amount
of fuel ejected into the channels in these tests was relatively small,
and thus, had little stored heat, and (c) the relatively cold cladding
and structure in these tests may rapidly cool the fuel. Two further
items may have promoted the rather localized plateout in the CAMEL
tests. First, the ejection of the thermite fuel in several CAMEL tests
was accompanied by excessive amounts of gas. Second, the CAMEL ejection
pressure was high for longer times than expected for fuel ejection from
prototypic pins. Both these items cause coolant channel voiding and lack
of fragmentation.

In PLUTO2, one particulate and two continuous fuel flow regimes are
modeled. The latter include annular flow (which can be a total or a
partial annular flow) and bubbly flow. Flow regime in a cell is
determined based on flow conditions in that cell, and can vary from cell
to cell. All possible PLUTO2 flow regimes are depicted in Figure 14.4.1.
The use of these flow regimes has the advantage of providing a geometry
which allows a more straighforward determination of the mass, momentum,
and energy exchange terms than in models not explicitly treating
different flow regimes.

The particulate or droplet flow regime has been traditionally assumed in
fuel‑coolant interaction (FCI) models such as the Cho‑Wright model
[14‑9], the Board‑Hall model [14‑40], and the MURTI model [14‑41].
Whole‑core modules assuming particulate flow include the SAS/FCI module
of SAS3D [14‑1] and the EPIC code [14‑7, 14‑8] which has been coupled
with the SAS3D code. It is also interesting to note that the SIMMER‑II
disassembly and transition phase code [14‑29] treats all its moving
liquid or solid components as droplet or particulate flows. However,
some attempts are made to account for the effect of flow regimes on
exchange terms.

The PLUTO code [14‑3, 14‑4], which is the predecessor of PLUTO2, assumed
exclusively particulate or droplet flow. It was nevertheless successful
in analyzing the fuel motion and sodium voiding during the first few
tens of milliseconds after pin failure in the E8 $3/s TOP experiment
[14‑5, 14‑6] and also the fuel motion and voiding during the first event
of the H6 $0.5/s TOP experiment [14‑6].

The particulate flow regime has therefore been retained in PLUTO2. The
fuel ejected into liquid sodium is assumed to instantaneously fragment
into droplets or particles of radius RAFPLA if the liquid sodium
fraction $\theta_{\text{N1}} > \text{VFNALQ} \cdot \theta_{\text{ch, op}}$ . Both
RAFPLA and VFNALQ are input. All particles can, later on, simultaneously
further fragment (after an input time delay of TIFP after pin failure)
into smaller particles with radius RAFPSM, which is also input.
Moreover, if the liquid sodium fraction in a certain channel node
exceeds the input value VFNARE, mobile fuel, which was previously in a
continuous flow regime (i.e., annular or bubbly flow), will
instantaneously fragment into droplets in this node. This is an attempt
to simulate delayed FCIs generated by sodium slugs reentering from
below.

The continuous fuel flow regime in PLUT02 will develop if considerable
local voiding has occurred $\left(\theta_{\text{N1}} < \text{VFNALQ} \cdot \theta_{\text{ch, op}} \right)$ 
and if the fuel energy is above the input fuel energy
EGMN. For the latter a value somewhat above the solidus energy is
suggested. This is because particles with an average energy
corresponding to the solidus may already have a frozen outer crust which
will prevent them from splattering on cladding and will thus not lead to
an annular film flow. For the input value VFNALQ, which is the liquid
sodium fraction below which a continuous fuel flow can develop, a value
of 0.33 is recommended because it was used in the successful L8
post‑test analysis [14‑15, 14‑12].

Once a continuous fuel flow has developed and is not yet occupying most
of the coolant channel open cross sectional area at a certain elevation,
a partially or fully annular fuel flow regime is assumed at that
elevation. The partially annular flow regime was introduced because it
appears unlikely that a relatively small amount of liquid fuel would
spread around the entire perimeter of the coolant channel (see
Eq. (14.4-78)). Once the fuel volume fraction at a certain axial elevation
becomes higher than the input value CIBBIN (for which a value of 0.7 is
recommended), the development of a bubbly fuel flow is assumed to occur.
This bubbly flow is then assumed to exist until the fuel volume fraction
drops below 2/3 of the input volume fraction CIBBIN. This is because
surface tension effects can maintain the bubbly flow down to a lower
fuel volume fraction compared to the value required to cause the onset
of the bubbly flow. The decision about flow regime changes is made at
the end of subroutine PLVOFR. The logic flow for deciding whether the
flow regime in a certain node should remain the same or whether it
should change to another one is shown in Figure 14.4.4. The sequence of
“if” checks and statements is exactly the same as in the program. The
input parameters appearing in the flowchart have already been described
above. The meaning of the Flow Regime [F.R.] numbers is the following:

F.R. 1 particulate or droplet flow regime

F.R. 3 partially or fully annular fuel flow

F.R. 4 bubbly fuel flow

The flow regime labels for each node i are stored in the code in pointer
array IFLAG(I). The value 2 has been reserved for a possible future
PLUTO2 version in which cladding motion is considered and in which the
number 2 would designate nodes with moving cladding. In the LEVITATE
module, flow regime 2 is operational and designates molten cladding flow
with imbedded fuel drops or chunks.

In explaining the flow chart logic, it is best to start at the time of
PLUTO2 initiation when the flow regime in all nodes is set to 1
(particulate flow). The fuel will remain in flow regime 1 at least until
the fourth diamond from above leads to a “no”. However, if the fuel
particles are already cold enough, the third diamond from above will
keep them in particulate form. If both the third and fourth diamond lead
to “no”, the logic flow will drop straight through, lead to a complete
entrainment of the liquid sodium film in the node considered and then
switch to the annular flow regime (F.R. = 3). If the lowermost diamond
leads to a “no”, a switch to the bubbly flow regime (F.R. = 4) will be
made. If such a switch occurs, the vapor/gas/sodium droplets mixture
velocity will be set to the fuel velocity. This is done at the moment of
bubbly flow regime initiation only. This helps to initialize a
well‑behaved two‑fluid bubbly flow calculation. Starting with the
previous vapor/gas/sodium droplets mixture velocity from the annular
flow, which can be fairly high, can cause problems with the inertial
terms in the bubbly flow calculation.

Once an annular or bubbly flow regime has been established in a node,
the only way to get back to the particulate or droplet regime is via the
first diamond. The latter will make it a particulate flow only if
enough liquid sodium has reentered into the node considered. Once a
bubbly flow regime has been established, it will get back to the annular
flow regime only if the second lowest diamond leads to a “no”. Overall,
it has been attempted to keep the numerical nodes in the same flow
regime for a reasonable length of time. This has helped to stabilize the
overall calculation.

Figure 14.4.4 Flow Chart Showing the Selection of Fuel Flow Regime in a Coolant Channel Mesh Cell

[anchor: fuel-plateout-and-frozen-fuel-crust-release-in-subroutine-plfrez]

### 14.4.3.2. Fuel Plateout and Frozen Fuel Crust Release in Subroutine PLFREZ

In subroutine PLFREZ (PLUTO2 FREEZING ROUTINE), the amount of
fuel plating out on cladding and structure as well as the amount of
frozen fuel crust released from an underlying melting cladding are
calculated. This information is later used in subroutine PLMISC to
update the frozen fuel geometry. PLFREZ is called before the mass
conservation equations and it can therefore provide updated densities
and velocities of the moving components for the mass conservation. (The
velocity change of the moving mixture due to frozen crust release is
calculated in PLFREZ). However, since PLFREZ uses data from the end of
the last time step, it could also have been called at the end of the
calculational sequence as it is done in LEVITATE.

Fuel plateout on the cladding and structure of channel node i can only
occur if there is either an annular or bubbly fuel flow regime in that
node. Solid particles or particles with a reasonably thick solid outer
crust are not believed to be able to stick to a cold surface, and molten
droplets can exist in PLUTO2 only if there is a significant liquid
sodium volume fraction ( $\theta_{\text{N1}} > \text{VFNALQ} \cdot \theta_{\text{ch, op}}$ ;
see previous section). The liquid sodium and, in particular, the liquid
sodium film are assumed to prevent molten fuel droplets from sticking to
cold surfaces because the droplets should form thin solid crusts due to
the contact with the liquid sodium. The assumption that liquid droplets
which are surrounded by significant amounts of liquid sodium will not
plate out on cold surfaces may be questionable when a jet of fuel
droplets hits a cold wall with a reasonably high velocity. In this case,
the droplets may splatter on the cold wall and form a moving liquid
film, which soon freezes and sticks despite the presence of liquid
sodium. Such a high‑velocity impingement of fuel may have occurred in
the P4 test [14‑42] or during the later stages of some of the CAMEL
tests [14‑38, 14‑39]. This high‑velocity impingement is not modeled in
PLUTO2, but its effect can be roughly simulated by using for the input
value VFNALQ, which is the sodium liquid fraction above which droplet or
particle flow is allowed, a value close to 1, and for the input value
VFNARE, also a value close to 1 and greater than VFNALQ. In the P4
pre‑test analysis with PLUTO2, VFNALQ = 0.33 was used (similar values
had been used in the successful PLUTO2 analyses of H6 [14‑6] and L8
[14‑15, 14-12]). This input choice led to the prediction of total fuel
sweepout because only flow regime 1 (particulate or droplet flow) was
selected by the code. The P4 experiment, however, showed extensive
plateout and little sweepout. The above explanation of a high‑velocity
fuel jet hitting the cladding, however, is not the only possible
explanation. Another explanation for this preferential plateout may be
that the sodium could have bypassed the ejected fuel in this relatively
large bundle test and, therefore, not exerted the full inlet pressure on
it.

To be in the annular or bubbly flow regime is only one of the necessary
conditions for initiating plateout. The other ones are:

$$e_{\text{vu}} < \text{EGBBLY}$$ [eq 14.4-51]

and

$$T_{\text{ffcl}} < T_{\text{fu,sol}}$$ [eq 14.4-52]

and

$$T_{\text{cl,os}} < \text{TECLMN}$$ [eq 14.4-53]

and

$$\theta_{\text{ch,op}} > 0.3 \theta_{\text{ch}}$$ [eq 14.4-54]

Moreover, the moving fuel volume fraction is not allowed to drop below
0.01 of the channel volume fraction due to fuel plateout. This is done
to avoid problems with zero amounts of moving fuel.

The condition Eq. (14.4-51) states that the moving fuel energy
should be below the input value EGBBLY which has to be within the
melting band of the fuel. A value in the lower part of the melting band
is recommended, based on the L8 analysis with PLUTO2 [14‑15, 14‑12]. One
should be careful that the input value EGMN, below which a continuous
flow regime cannot develop (see Figure 14.4.4), is smaller than EGBBLY
because this can inhibit plateout.

The condition Eq. (14.4-52) states that the temperature of the fuel crust on
the cladding should be below the fuel solidus temperature in order to
allow plateout. Fuel should not plate out on already molten fuel crusts
(layers), and, as soon as the fuel crust temperature has increased half
way into the melting band, this fuel crust will actually be ablated by
the moving fuel field (see below).

The condition Eq. (14.4-53) states that fuel plateout will occur only if the
cladding surface temperature is less than the input value TECLMN. This
value should be set to the steel solidus temperature TESOL (which is
input) or somewhat above it. It is believed that freezing fuel will not
stick to a molten cladding surface but rather slide over it. However, it
will probably also ablate some of the molten steel which is not treated
in PLUTO2. If one wants to consider this phenomenon, one will have to
switch to the LEVITATE module, which is treating steel ablation. This
can be done by setting the input value NCPLEV to a low integer number.

The condition Eq. (14.4-54) limits the frozen fuel fraction in a node to 70%
of the nodal volume. Thus a complete plugging of a coolant channel is
not allowed in PLUTO2. This is done because the PLUTO2 equations are
written for relatively smoothly varying flow cross sections.

If all the
above‑mentioned conditions are met in a channel cell, then fuel plateout
will occur in that cell. There are two possibilities:

If

$$e_{\text{fu,sol}} < e_{\text{fu}} < \text{EGBBLY}~,$$

the amount of mobile fuel which will be plated out in node $i$ during
 $\Delta t_{\text{PL}}$ is calculated from:

$$\Delta {\rho'}_{\text{fu,i}} = {\rho'}_{\text{fu,i}} \cdot \frac{\text{EGBBLY} - e_{\text{fu,i}}}{\text{EGBBLY} - e_{\text{fu,sol}}}$$ [eq 14.4-55]

The input parameter (EGBBLY) appeared already in Eq. (14.4-51). It has to
be between the fuel solidus and liquidus energies. The latter are the
input values EGFUSO and EGFULQ, respectively. It was mentioned earlier
that a value in the lower part of the melting range is recommended based
on the PLUTO2 L8 analysis [14‑15, 14‑12]. The fuel which plates out is
assumed to have a temperature of

$$T_{\text{fu,fz,i}} = T_{\text{fu,sol}}$$ [eq 14.4-56]

This assumption leads to a temperature increase of the mobile fuel when
plateout occurs and is accounted for in the code. The underlying
assumption is that the mobile fuel has a radial temperature gradient
with the freezing fuel being at the fuel solidus temperature.

If

$$e_{\text{fu}} < e_{\text{fu,sol}}~,$$

the fraction of the mobile fuel plated out in a PLUTO2 time step of
 $\Delta t_{\text{PL}}$ second will be calculated from

$$\Delta{\rho'}_{\text{fu,i}} = {\rho'}_{\text{fu,i}} \Delta t_{\text{PL}} \cdot \frac{1}{2 \text{ ms}}$$ [eq 14.4-57]

which causes a near complete fuel plateout of the mobile fuel in $2 \text{ ms}$ .
This situation can occur when frozen fuel crusts, which were released in
another cell due to melting cladding, slide into a cell in which
cladding has not yet melted. The assumption is that these fuel crusts
will bring with them some liquid steel that will make them stick on
still‑unmelted cladding. The temperature of the plated‑out fuel in this
case equals the temperature of the moving fuel.

$$T_{\text{fu,fz,i}} = T_{\text{fu,i}}$$ [eq 14.4-58]

For both cases, the temperature changes of the frozen fuel crusts on
cladding and structure are calculated in the same way by making use of
the assumptions about $T_{\text{fu, fz}}$ in Eq. (14.4-56) and Eq. (14.4-58).

$$T_{\text{ffci,i}}^{\text{new}} = \frac{T_{\text{fu,fz,i}} \Delta {\rho'}_{\text{fu,i}} + T_{\text{ffcl,i}}^{\text{old}} {\rho'}_{\text{ff,i}}}{{\rho'}_{\text{ff,i}} + \Delta {\rho'}_{\text{fu,i}}}$$ [eq 14.4-59]

and

$$T_{\text{ffsr,i}}^{\text{new}} = \frac{T_{\text{fu,fz,i}} \Delta {\rho'}_{\text{fu,i}} + T_{\text{ffsr}}^{\text{old}} {\rho'}_{\text{ff,i}}}{{\rho'}_{\text{ff,i}} + \Delta {\rho'}_{\text{fu,i}}}$$ [eq 14.4-60]

Because the relative fractions of the fuel plating out on cladding and
on structure and the relative fractions of fuel already plated out on
cladding and structure are assumed to be the same, the above two
equations are very similar. This is because the fraction of the fuel
plating out on cladding cancels out in Eq. (14.4-59), and the fraction of
fuel plating out on the structure cancels out in Eq. (14.4-60). Although
separate temperatures for the frozen film on the cladding and structure
are tracked in PLUTO2, only one common smear density is tracked for the
frozen films. This should be improved in a future PLUTO2 version.

When fuel plateout has occurred, the generalized densities of the mobile
and frozen fuel, the generalized volume fractions $\theta_{\text{ch,op}}$ ,
 $\theta_{\text{fu}}$ , and $\theta_{\text{vg}}$ of the open channel, mobile fuel, and
the vapor/gas mixture are updated. Moreover, the channel hydraulic
diameter is updated:

$$D_{\text{ch}}^{\text{new}} = D_{\text{ch}}^{\text{old}} \cdot \frac{\left( \theta_{\text{ch,op}} \
 - \frac{\Delta{\rho'}_{\text{fu}}}{\rho_{\text{fu,sol}}} \right)}{\theta_{\text{ch,op}}}$$ [eq 14.4-61]

This change in the hydraulic diameter is based only on the changes in
the open channel cross‑section area because the perimeter of the open
channel will remain approximately the same whether a fuel crust is
present or not. This is a reasonable approximation for an actual
subchannel, but it would not be good for a cylindrical pipe.

Fuel crusts can also be released and added back into the moving fuel
field. One apparent reason is that the fuel crust can become re‑melted
due to fission heating and/or the heat flux from the moving fuel. In the
code, the crust release due to remelting is initiated when the fuel
crust temperature is half way through the melting band. The fraction
CFMELT of the crust released per PLUTO2 time step is calculated from:

$$\text{CFMELT} = \frac{T_{\text{ffcl,i}} - \frac{\left( T_{\text{fu,liq}} + T_{\text{fu,sol}} \right)}{2}}{T_{\text{fu,liq}} \
 - \frac{\left( T_{\text{fu,liq}} + T_{\text{fu,sol}} \right)}{2}}$$ [eq 14.4-62]

The new generalized smear density of the fuel crust is

$${\rho'}_{\text{ff,i}} = {\rho'}_{\text{ff,i}}^{\text{old}} - \Delta \rho_{\text{ff,i}}$$ [eq 14.4-63]

where

$$\Delta {\rho'}_{\text{ff,i}}^{\text{old}} = {\rho'}_{\text{ff,i}}^{\text{old}} \cdot \text{CFMELT}$$ [eq 14.4-64]

A melting fuel crust is assumed to have a higher temperature at the
interface with the gas/vapor mixture than at the interface with the
cladding because the cladding cannot be significantly molten since this
would have led to crust ablation (see below). Therefore the crust
thickness is reduced in this case of crust melting:

$$\text{TKFF} = \text{TKFF}^{\text{old}} \cdot \left( 1 - \text{CFMELT} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-65]

The other reason for releasing a fuel crust in PLUTO2 is the melting of
the underlying cladding. The frozen fuel crust in mesh cell $i$ will be
released in PLUTO2 when the temperature of the middle cladding node has
exceeded the input value TECLRL in cell $i$ . A value in the upper part
of the cladding melting band is recommended. The frozen crust is rapidly
released in this case according to

$$\Delta {\rho'}_{\text{ff,i}} = \rho_{\text{fu,sol}} \theta_{\text{ch}} \Delta t_{\text{PL}} \cdot \frac{1}{5 \text{ ms}}$$ [eq 14.4-66]

This means that a crust which would initially fill the entire channel
would be completely released in 5 ms. A crust occupying only a
fraction $\text{FN}_{\text{ff}}$ of the channel would be released in
 $\text{FN}_{\text{ff}} \cdot 5 \text{ ms}$ . The change in the generalized densities of
the fuel crust and also the mobile fuel are calculated with Eq. (14.4-63)
and Eq. (14.4-64). In this case of frozen crust release, it is likely fuel
pieces with the full crust thickness will get released and that only the
fraction of the channel perimeter, which is covered by frozen crust,
which is CFFFCL, gets reduced:

$$\text{CFFFCL} \left( I \right) = \text{CFFFCL} \left( I \right) \cdot \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{ff}}^{\text{new}}}{{\rho'}_{\text{ff}}^{\text{old}}}$$ [eq 14.4-67]

It is important to note that the treatment of frozen crust release after
the underlying cladding has melted and also the disallowing of fuel
plateout on molten cladding made the successful L8 post‑test analysis
with PLUTO2 possible [14‑15, 14‑12]. In the pre‑test analysis, these
phenomena were not considered and led to a considerable underprediction
of the fuel dispersal [14‑43, 14-16]. The current treatment, however, is
not yet ideal because the released frozen crust pieces are homogenized
with the mobile fuel in the node considered. Ideally, these frozen fuel
pieces should be treated in a separate chunk field. Such a treatment is
being incorporated in the chunk version of the LEVITATE module. Once
this version has been made compatible with the SAS4A release version,
one can switch to it via the NCPLEV input parameter. This input
parameter specifies the number of axial cladding nodes which have to be
fully molten before a switch from PLUTO2 to LEVITATE occurs.

For both the remelting of a crust and the release of a frozen crust,
energy and velocity adjustments for the moving fuel are made in the
lower section of subroutine PLFREZ. Although these adjustments could
also be made later in the fuel energy and momentum equations, it is
easier to do it in this subroutine because several local variables that
are needed would have to become part of the common blocks. The energy
adjustment for the moving fuel is:

$$e_{\text{fu,i}}^{\text{new}} = \frac{e_{\text{fu,i}}^{\text{old}} {\rho'}_{\text{fu,i}} + e_{\text{fu,rl,i}}^{\text{old}} \Delta {\rho'}_{\text{ff,i}}}{{\rho'}_{\text{fu,i}} + \Delta {\rho'}_{\text{ff,i}}}$$ [eq 14.4-68]

where

$$\begin{split}e_{\text{fu,r1}} = \begin{cases}
e_{\text{fu,liq}} & \text{for a melting crust} \\
e_{\text{ff}} & \text{for a crust which is released due to clad melting} \\
\end{cases}\end{split}$$

The calculation of the velocity adjustments for the moving fuel at the
lower and upper boundaries of the mesh cell $i$ is as follows:

$$u_{\text{fu,i}}^{\text{new}} = u_{\text{fu,i}}^{\text{old}} \cdot \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fu,i-1}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fu,i}}}{{\rho'}_{\text{fu,i-1}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fu,i}} + \Delta{\rho'}_{\text{ff,i-1}} + \Delta {\rho'}}$$ [eq 14.4-69]

$$u_{\text{fu,i+1}}^{\text{new}} = u_{\text{fu,i+1}}^{\text{old}} \cdot \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fu,i}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fu,i+1}}}{{\rho'}_{\text{fu,i1}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fu,i+1}} + \Delta {\rho'}_{\text{ff,i}} + \Delta {\rho'}_{\text{ff,i+1}}}$$ [eq 14.4-70]

If the release of a fuel crust has taken place, the generalized volume
fractions $\theta_{\text{ch,op}}$ , $\theta_{\text{fu}}$ , and $\theta_{\text{vg}}$ of the
open channel, the mobile fuel, and the vapor/gas, respectively, are
updated at the end of subroutine PLFREZ. Moreover, the hydraulic
diameter of the channel is updated

$$D_{\text{ch}}^{\text{new}} = \frac{D_{\text{ch}}^{\text{old}} \cdot \left( \theta_{\text{ch,op}} - \frac{\Delta {\rho'}_{\text{ff}}}{\rho_{\text{fu,sol}}} \right)}{\theta_{\text{ch,op}}^{\text{old}}}$$ [eq 14.4-71]

This change in the hydraulic diameter is based only on changes in the
open channel cross‑section area because the perimeter of a real
sub‑channel will be approximately the same whether a fuel crust is
present or has been released.

[anchor: platedout-and-moving-fuel-configurations]

### 14.4.3.3. Plated‑Out and Moving Fuel Configurations

The different configurations of the plated‑out and moving fuel in PLUTO2
are shown in Figure 14.4.1 at the beginning of Section 14.4.1. These
configurations are shown in a cylindrical geometry although the areas
and wetted perimeters used in the code are based on the actual
subchannel values. The outer perimeter of the cylindrical channel shown
in Figure 14.4.1 represents mostly cladding but also some structure. The
various fuel configurations are of importance for calculating the energy
and momentum exchange terms because the interface areas are largely
determined by the fuel configurations. The fuel flow regime selection
has already been described in Section 14.4.3.1. In the present section,
the assumptions about the specific fuel configuration in each flow
regime are described. In the code, these are implemented near the front
of subroutine PLMISC (PLUTO2 MISCELLANEOUS).

In the particulate flow regime [see configuration (a) in Figure 14.4.1],
the only assumption is that the particles are uniformly distributed in a
numerical cell. With regard to the heat transfer between fuel and liquid
sodium, both the liquid sodium film and the sodium droplets are also
assumed to be uniformly distributed. The heat‑transfer area between
fuel and liquid Na per unit of generalized smear volume is assumed to be

$${A'}_{\text{fi,N1}} = {A'}_{\text{Pa}} \cdot \left( \frac{\theta_{\text{N1}}}{\theta_{\text{ch,op}}} \right)^{\text{CIA2}}$$ [eq 14.4-72]

where

$${A'}_{\text{Pa}} = {N'}_{\text{Pa}} \cdot 4\pi r_{\text{Pa}}^{2}$$

 ${N'}_{\text{Pa}} = \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fu}}}{\frac{4}{3} \pi r_{\text{Pa}}^{3} \rho_{\text{fu,sol}}}$ ,
number of fuel particles in a generalized smear volume

 $\theta_{\text{N1}}$ = the generalized liquid sodium volume fraction
which includes the moving sodium droplets and the static sodium film.

CIA2 = input constant (see Eq. (14.4-116)).

The heat‑transfer area between fuel particles and the vapor/gas mixture
is:

$${A'}_{\text{fu,vg}} = {N'}_{\text{Pa}} 4\pi_{\text{Pa}}^{2} \cdot \left\lbrack 1 - \left( \frac{\theta_{\text{N1}}}{\theta_{\text{ch,op}}} \right)^{\text{CIA2}} \right\rbrack$$ [eq 14.4-73]

For the continuous flow regimes [see (b) through (e) in Figure 14.4.1],
the assumed interaction areas between the various components are
considerably more complicated than for the particulate flow regime.
Several important Fortran variables describing the different
configurations for continuous fuel flow will be explained first.

$$\text{ARCH} = \theta_{\text{ch}} \cdot \frac{\text{AXMX}}{\text{NPIN}}$$ [eq 14.4-74]

where ARCH is the coolant channel cross section area associated with
one pin. AXMX has already been described in Section 14.4.2.1. NPIN
is the number of pins per subassembly. Both $\text{AXMX}$ and $\text{NPIN}$ are input.

$$\text{ARMF} = \text{ARCH} \cdot \frac{\theta_{\text{fu}}}{\theta_{\text{ch}}}$$ [eq 14.4-75]

where ARMF is the cross‑sectional area of moving fuel associated with
one pin.

$$\text{ARFF} = \text{ARCH} \cdot \frac{\left( \theta_{\text{ch}} - \theta_{\text{ch,op}} \right)}{\theta_{\text{ch}}}$$ [eq 14.4-76]

where ARFF is the cross‑sectional area of plated‑out fuel which is
associated with one pin.

$$\text{PECH} = \left( \text{ARCL}' + \text{ARSR}' \right) \cdot \frac{\text{AXMX}}{\text{NPIN}}$$ [eq 14.4-77]

where PECH is the channel perimeter associated with one pin. This also
includes a fraction of the structure perimeter. The quantities
ARCL’ and ARSR’ are the cladding and structure surface areas per
unit of generalized smear volume. Moreover, they are also the total
perimeters of the cladding and structure (times one meter) in a unit of
generalized smear volume.

The fraction of the cladding and structure which is covered by either
molten or plated‑out fuel, CFFUCL, has the value 1.0 in the bubbly
flow regime. In the annular flow regime (see b,c, and d in Figure 14.4.1),
CFFUCL is taken to be a linear function of the total (moving fuel +
fuel crust) fuel volume fraction.

$$\text{CFFUCL} = \frac{\text{ARMF} + \text{ARFF}}{\text{ARCH}} \cdot \frac{1}{\text{CIANIN}}$$ [eq 14.4-78]

or if CFFUCL calculated from Eq. (14.4-78) is greater than 1.0:

$$\text{CFFUCL} = 1.0$$ [eq 14.4-79]

The latter value applies to condition d in Figure 14.4.1. The input
parameter CIANIN in Eq. (14.4-78) determines the fuel volume fraction
above which a complete annular fuel flow will exist (i.e., condition d
in Figure 14.4.1). A value of 0.5 is recommended, based on the L8 TREAT
test analysis with PLUTO2 [14‑15, 14‑12].

In the annular flow regimes, the thickness TKFU of the layer
containing both moving and plated‑out fuel is also important. Its
calculation is based on the conservation of fuel volume:

$$\text{TKFU} = \frac{\left( \text{ARFF} + \text{ARMF} \right)}{\left( \text{PECH} \cdot \text{CFFUCL} \right)}$$ [eq 14.4-80]

The frozen fuel crust, which is important in both the annular and the
bubbly flow regimes is also characterized by two variables. These are
the frozen fuel crust thickness TKFF and the fraction CFFFCL of the
channel perimeter that is covered by frozen fuel crust. Both TKFF and
CFFFCL are permanent arrays in the code (which are updated during the
time steps), whereas the thickness and coverage fraction of the layer
including all the fuel are recalculated every PLUTO2 time step. The
calculation of the change in the frozen fuel cross‑sectional area due to
remelting or release has been described in the previous section. The
change of the frozen fuel cross section due to freezing can cause both
an increase in the frozen crust thickness TKFF and in the coverage
fraction CFFFCL. How much either one increases depends on whether bulk
type freezing or conduction‑limited freezing [14‑44, 14-45, 14‑46] is
more appropriate. In PLUTO2 the mode of plateout of fuel for the
partially annular, totally annular and bubbly flow regime is controlled
by an input parameter (CIFUFZ) which allows both extremes or values
anywhere between these two extremes. The increase in the crust thickness
is calculated from:

$$\Delta \text{TKFF} = \frac{\Delta \text{ARFF}}{\text{CFFFCL} \cdot \text{PECH}} \cdot \frac{H_{\text{fu,ff}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} \
 - T_{\text{ff}} \right)}{H_{\text{fu,ff}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{\text{ff}} \right) + H_{\text{fu,cl}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{\text{cl,os}} \right) \cdot \text{CIFUFZ}}$$ [eq 14.4-81]

where

 $\Delta \text{ARFF}$ = the change in the frozen fuel cross section during one
PLUTO2 time step.

CFFFCL = the fraction of the channel perimeter covered by plated‑out
fuel at the beginning of the PLUTO2 time step.

CIFUFZ = an input parameter whose value should be between 0 and 1.0. A
value of zero leads to pure bulk‑type freezing (i.e., the crust grows
till it reaches the thickness of the total molten fuel layer thickness
before the coverage fraction CFFFCL increases). A value of 1 leads to
a conduction‑type freezing. $\text{CIFUFZ} = 0$ was used in the L8 analysis
[14‑15, 14‑12] because no other option was available at that time.

and the moving fuel‑to‑frozen‑fuel heat flux per unit temperature
difference and per unit of generalized smear volume is given by

$$H_{\text{fu,ff}} = h_{\text{fu,ff}} \cdot \text{CFFFCL} \cdot \text{CFMFFF} \cdot \text{PECH}$$ [eq 14.4-82]

where

 $h_{\text{fu,ff}}$ = the heat-transfer coefficient between molten fuel
and frozen fuel which takes the resistance in the fuel crust into
account. It is described in the following section on exchange terms.

and

$$\text{CFMFFF} = \frac{\text{ARMF}}{\left( \text{ARMF} + \text{ARFF} \right)}$$ [eq 14.4-83]

In Eq. (14.4-82) and Eq. (14.4-83), CFMFFF is the fraction of the frozen
crust that is assumed to be covered with moving fuel. In the bubbly flow
regime, CFMFFF is always 1.0. The moving fuel-to-cladding heat flux
required in Eq. (14.4-81) is given by

$$H_{\text{fu,cl}} = h_{\text{fu,cl}} \left(\text{CFFUCL} - \text{CFFFCL} \right) \cdot \text{PECH}$$ [eq 14.4-84]

where

 $h_{\text{fu,cl}}$ is the heat-transfer coefficient between moving fuel
and cladding, which is described in the following section on exchange
coefficients.

The initialization of the crust thickness during the first time step
when plateout commences is also affected by the input parameter CIFUFZ
that was discussed above:

$$\text{TKFF} = \frac{\text{ARMF} + \text{ARFF}}{\text{PECH} \cdot \text{CFFUCL}} \cdot \left( 1 - \text{CIFUFZ} \right) + \frac{\text{ARFF}}{\text{PECH} \cdot \text{CFFUCL}} \cdot \text{CIFUFZ}$$ [eq 14.4-85]

where the first term on the right-hand side would lead to the maximum
initial crust thickness for $\text{CIFUFZ} = 0$ and the second term gives the
minimum thickness if $\text{CIFUFZ} = 1$ . The latter will cause the frozen fuel
coverage fraction of the channel perimeter (CFFFCL) to be the same as
the one for the total (moving + frozen) fuel, CFFUCL. Since TKFF and
CFFFCL are permanent arrays in the code, the initial values of these
variables are quite important. The frozen fuel coverage fraction of the
channel perimeter is calculated, based on frozen fuel volume
conservation:

$$\text{CFFFCL} = \frac{\text{ARFF}}{\left( \text{TKFF} \cdot \text{PECH} \right)}$$ [eq 14.4-86]

If $\text{CFFFCL} > \text{CFFUCL}$ , $\text{CFFFCL}$ and $\text{TKFF}$ will be:

$$\text{CFFFCL} = \text{CFFUCL}$$ [eq 14.4-87]

and

$$\text{TKFF} = \frac{\text{ARFF}}{\left( \text{PECH} \cdot \text{CFFUCL} \right)}$$ [eq 14.4-88]

The crust dimension calculations described above hold in all continuous
flow regimes.

[anchor: energy-and-momentum-exchange-terms-in-subroutine-plmisc]

### 14.4.3.4. Energy and Momentum Exchange Terms in Subroutine PLMISC

Besides calculating the moving and frozen fuel configurations,
subroutine PLMISC (PLUTO2 MISCELLANEOUS) also calculates many
heat-transfer and friction coefficients that are later used in the
calculation of the fuel energy equations, the sodium energy equation,
and in the channel momentum equation. The latter also requires several
drag coefficients which are determined in the subroutine calculating the
channel momentum equation, PLMOCO. However, some of the variables needed
for the drag coefficients are also calculated in subroutine PLMISC.

Several heat and momentum exchange terms described below are still in a
simplified or preliminary form. Additional validation efforts, which are
outlined in the SAS4A validation plan [14-10], will be necessary to
improve certain heat and momentum exchange terms. However, the
reasonably successful analyses of TREAT experiments L8 and H6 [14-15,
14-12, 14-6] may be an indication that all of the more important
exchange terms are treated properly.

[anchor: heat-transfer-and-momentum-exchange-terms-between-sodium-and-cladding-and-sodium-and-structure]

#### 14.4.3.4.1. Heat-transfer and Momentum Exchange Terms Between Sodium and Cladding, and Sodium and Structure

[anchor: near-liquid-sodium]

14.4.3.4.1.1. Near-Liquid Sodium

If $\alpha_{\text{Na}} < \text{CIVOID}$ , where CIVOID is an input parameter,
liquid single-phase correlations will be used if there is still cladding
or structure that is not covered by fuel (i.e., particulate or partially
annular fuel flow). The input parameter CIVOID determines the sodium
void fraction below which these correlations will be used. A value of
0.5 is recommended based on the L8 analysis [14-15, 14-12]. The
heat-transfer coefficient that is used for low-void fraction sodium flow
which has a low Prandtl number of about 0.005, is based on Ref. 14-47.

$$\begin{split} h_{\text{Na,cl,i}} = \left\lbrack C1 \cdot \left( D_{\text{N1}} \cdot \rho_{\text{N1}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi,i}} + u_{\text{Mi,i+1}} \right| \cdot 0.5 \cdot \frac{C_{\text{p,N1}}}{k_{\text{N1}}} \right)^{C2} + C3 \right\rbrack \\
 \cdot \frac{k_{\text{N1}}}{D_{\text{ch}}} \cdot \text{CFNACL}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-89]

where all variables without axial indexes are calculated at the center
of cell $i$ 

 $C1, C2$ and $C3$ are input constants, and

 $k_{\text{N1}} = \text{CDNL}$ which is a constant input value for the
liquid sodium thermal conductivity

 $C_{\text{p,N1}}$ = liquid sodium heat capacity whose
temperature dependence is described in the material property section of
Chapter 12.

 $D_{\text{n1}} = D_{\text{ch}} \cdot \frac{\theta_{\text{N1}}}{\theta_{\text{ch, op}}}$ is the hydraulic diameter for
the liquid sodium which is assumed to be in an annular flow regime.

 $D_{\text{ch}}$ = hydraulic diameter of the open coolant channel which
takes the presence of a fuel crust into account (see Eq. (14.4-61))

 $\text{CFNACL}$ = fraction of the channel perimeter that is wetted by sodium.
When the particulate flow regime exists, a fraction of the perimeter can
be covered by frozen fuel. The value of CFNACL is in this case

$$\text{CFNACL} = \left( 1 - \text{CFFFCL} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-90]

If an annular flow regime exists

$$\text{CFNACL} = \left( 1 - \text{CFFUCL} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-91]

The CFNACL should actually be lumped together with the heat-transfer
area. However, to lump such terms together with heat-transfer
coefficients has the advantage that the total heat flow rates, which are
calculated at the end of subroutine PLMISC, include only the total
cladding or structure areas.

The heat-transfer coefficient between low-void fraction sodium and the
structure is set equal to that between low-void fraction sodium and
cladding

$$h_{\text{NA,sr,i}} = h_{\text{Na,cl,i}}$$ [eq 14.4-92]

The friction factor used for the low-void fraction sodium and
fission-gas mixture is:

$$F_{\text{Mi}} = \text{AFR} \cdot \left( \text{Re}_{\text{Mi}} \right)^{\text{BFR}}$$ [eq 14.4-93]

where

 $\text{AFR}$ , $\text{BRF}$ are input constants

 $\text{Re}_{\text{Mi}}$ Reynolds number of the mixture of sodium and fission gas
which is calculated from:

$$\text{Re}_{\text{Mi}} = \left\{ D_{\text{ch}} \cdot |u_{\text{Mi,i}} + u_{\text{Mi,i+1}}| \cdot 0.5 \cdot \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{\left( \theta_{\text{vg}} + \theta_{\text{N1}} - \theta_{\text{Na,fm}} \right)} \right\} \bigg/ \mu_{\text{Mi}}$$ [eq 14.4-94]

where the viscosity of the two-phase mixture is evaluated from a
formulation suggested by Dukler [14-48]:

$$\mu_{\text{Mi}} = \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{\left( \theta_{\text{vg}} + \theta_{\text{N1}} - \theta_{\text{Na,fm}} \right)} \cdot \left\{ \frac{x_{\text{Mi}}\mu_{\text{vg}}}{\left( \rho_{\text{Nv}} \
 + \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fi}}}{\theta_{\text{vg}}} \right)} + \frac{\left( 1 - x_{\text{Mi}} \right)\mu_{\text{N1}}}{\rho_{\text{N1}}} \right\}$$ [eq 14.4-95]

where

 $\mu_{\text{Nl}}$ = VINL, viscosity of liquid sodium which is
input

 $\mu_{\text{vg}}$ = VIVG, viscosity of the vapor/gas mixture which is
input.

 $x_{\text{Mi}} = \frac{\left( \theta_{\text{vg}} \rho_{\text{Nv}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fi}} \right)}{{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}$ 
quality of moving sodium fission-gas mixture

 ${\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} = {\rho'}_{\text{Na}} - \rho_{\text{Nl}} \theta_{\text{Na, fm}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fi}}$ 

i.e., ${\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}$ is the generalized smear density of the moving
sodium and the fission gas.

[anchor: liquid-sodium-films-present-and-a-vapor-gas-mixture-or-two-phase-sodium-gas-mixture-in-the-gas-core]

14.4.3.4.1.2. Liquid Sodium Films Present and a Vapor/Gas Mixture or Two-phase Sodium/Gas Mixture in the Gas Core

If $\theta_{\text{Na, fm}} > 0$ and $\alpha_{\text{Na}} > \text{CIVOID}$ ,

liquid sodium film evaporation or condensation on the liquid film will
take place. A splitting of the currently available liquid film volume
fraction, $\theta_{\text{Na, fm}}$ , into a film volume fraction for the
cladding, $\theta_{\text{cl, fm}}$ , and for the structure, $\theta_{\text{sr, fm}}$ ,
is done in the following way:

$$\theta_{\text{sr,fm}} = \text{CINAFO} \cdot \theta_{\text{ch,op}} \cdot \frac{{A'}_{\text{sr}}}{{A'}_{\text{sr}} + {A'}_{\text{cl}}}$$ [eq 14.4-96]

$$\theta_{\text{cl,fm}} = \theta_{\text{Na,fm}} - \theta_{\text{sr,fm}}$$ [eq 14.4-97]

where $\text{CINAFO}$ is an input constant which gives the initial and maximum
film volume fraction. However, if $\theta_{\text{cl,fm}} \leq 0$ ,

$$\theta_{\text{sr,fm}} = \theta_{\text{Na,fm}}$$ [eq 14.4-98]

This means, that the structure film has its maximum value as long as a
liquid film exists on the cladding. If $T_{\text{Na}} > Tl_{\text{cl,os}}$ 

$$h_{\text{Na,c1}} = \text{CFNACN} \cdot \left( 1 - \text{CFFFCL} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-99]

where

 $\text{CFNACN}$ is the sodium condensation coefficient which is input

and for

 $\text{CFFFCL}$ see Eq. (14.4-81)

If $T_{\text{Na}} < T_{\text{cl,os}}$ 

$$h_{\text{Na,c1}} = \frac{1}{\left( \frac{1}{\text{CFNAEV}} \right) + \frac{w_{\text{cl,fm}}}{\text{CDNL}}} \cdot \left( 1 - \text{CFFFCL} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-100]

where

CFNAEV is the sodium evaporation coefficient which is input and which
should be larger than CFNACN which is discussed above

 $w_{\text{cl,fm}}$ is the thickness of the sodium film on
the clad

CDNL liquid sodium conductivity which is input

The sodium-to-structure heat-transfer coefficient,
 $h_{\text{Na,sr}}$ , is set equal to the
 $h_{\text{Na,cl}}$ calculated from Eq. (14.4-100) as long as
the structure has a lower temperature than the sodium. In the unlikely
case that the structure is hotter than the sodium, an equation similar
to Eq. (14.4-100) is used but with the structure film thickness,
 $w_{\text{sr,fm}}$ , instead of
 $w_{\text{cl,fm}}$ .

The friction factor for the case when liquid sodium films are present is
based on Ref. 14-49, page 320, and is calculated in the following way:

$$F_{\text{Mi}} = \text{AFRV} \cdot \left( \text{Re}_{\text{Mi}} \right)^{\text{BFRV}} \cdot \left\{ 1 + \left( 1 - \text{CFFUCL} \right) \cdot \frac{300 \left( w_{\text{cl,fm}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{cl}}
 + w_{\text{sr,fm}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{sr}} \right)}{D_{\text{ch}} \cdot \left( {A'}_{\text{cl}} + {A'}_{\text{sr}} \right)} \right\}$$ [eq 14.4-101]

where

 $\text{AFRV}$ and $\text{BFRV}$ are input constants

 $\text{Re}_{\text{Mi}}$ Reynolds number for the sodium/gas mixture (see Eq. (14.4-94))

[anchor: no-sodium-films-left-and-sodium-temperature-below-the-outer-cladding-temperature]

14.4.3.4.1.3. No Sodium Films Left and Sodium Temperature Below the Outer Cladding Temperature

This condition is common in the annular fuel flow regime in which liquid
sodium films are not allowed. Moreover, in the particulate flow regime,
the sodium films may have been completely entrained or evaporated. Two
conditions have to be considered. First, there can be a flow of sodium
droplets, vapor, and gas in the coolant channels or just a flow of vapor
and gas. For void fractions larger than the input value CIA4 (which has
to be larger than the input value CIVOID), the heat-transfer
coefficient used is a linear interpolation between a convective
heat-transfer coefficient for a pure vapor/gas moisture,
 $h_{\text{vg, cl}}$ , and a boiling heat-transfer coefficient
HCCLMI which is input. For void fractions smaller than CIA4 and larger
than CIVOID, a constant value is used:

$$h_{\text{Na,cl}} = \text{HCCLMI} \cdot \text{CFNACL}$$ [eq 14.4-102]

where

CFNACL is the fraction of the channel perimeter which is in contact
with the two-phase sodium (see also Eq. (14.4-103))

HCCLMI is an input heat-transfer coefficient describing the forced
convection heat transfer between sodium droplets and cladding.
HCCLMI should be definitely smaller than the evaporation coefficient
CFNAEV and probably also smaller than the condensation coefficient
CFNACN. It should also be remembered here that for sodium void
fractions less than the input value CIVOID, a single-phase convective
heat-transfer coefficient is used for the calculation of
 $h_{\text{Na, c} l}$ (see Eq. (14.4-89)). Therefore, CIA4 should
be larger than CIVOID.

For $\alpha_{\text{Na}} > \text{CIA4}$ , the above-mentioned linear interpolation is
done:

$$h_{\text{Na,cl}} = \frac{\left\lbrack \text{HCCLMI} \cdot \left( 1 - \alpha_{\text{Na}} \right) + h_{\text{vg,cl}} \cdot \left( \alpha_{\text{Na}} - \text{CIA4} \right) \right\rbrack \cdot \text{CFNACL}}{\left( 1 - \text{CIA4} \right)}$$ [eq 14.4-103]

where

 $\alpha_{\text{Na}} = \frac{\left( \theta_{\text{ch, op}} - \theta_{\text{N1}} - \theta_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\left( \theta_{\text{ch, op}} - \theta_{\text{fu}} \right)}$ 

 $\text{HCCLMI}$ = input heat-transfer coefficient (see Eq. (14.4-102))

 $\text{CFNACL} = \begin{cases}
1 = \text{CFFFCL} \quad \text{for the particulate fuel flow regime} & \text{(see Eq. 14.4-76)} \\
1 = \text{CFFUCL} \quad \text{for the annular fuel flow regime} & \text{(see Eq. 14.4-74)}
\end{cases}$ 

 $h_{\text{vg,c1}}$ = convective heat-transfer coefficient
between a vapor/gas mixture and cladding which is calculated from a
simplified Dittus-Boelter equation in which a Prandtl number of 0.7 is
assumed [14-50]:

$$h_{\text{vg,cl}} = 0.02 \cdot \frac{k_{\text{vg}}}{D_{\text{Mi}}} \cdot \left( \text{Re}_{\text{Mi}} \right)^{0.8}$$ [eq 14.4-104]

where

 $\text{Re}_{\text{Mi}} = \frac{D_{\text{Mi}} \cdot \rho_{\text{vg}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi,i}} + u_{\text{Mi,i} + 1} \right|}{2\ VIVG}$ 

VIVG = viscosity for the vapor/gas mixture which is input.

$$\begin{split}\rho_{\text{vg}} = \begin{cases}
\frac{{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{\left( \theta_{\text{ch,op}} - \theta_{\text{fu}} \right)} & \text{for } \alpha < 1 \\
\frac{\left( \rho_{\text{Nv}} \cdot \theta_{\text{vg}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fi}} \right)}{\left( \theta_{\text{ch,op}} - \theta_{\text{fu}} \right)} & \text{for } \alpha = 1
\end{cases}\end{split}$$

 $k_{\text{vg}} = \text{CDVG}$ , the input thermal conductivity for a vapor/gas
mixture.

$$D_{\text{Mi}} = D_{\text{ch}} \cdot \frac{\left( \theta_{\text{ch,op}} - \theta_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\theta_{\text{ch,op}}}$$ [eq 14.4-105]

For the calculation of the latter quantity, it is assumed that only the
cross-sectional area of the open channel is reduced due to a molten fuel
film, but not the perimeter.

[anchor: no-liquid-sodium-films-present-and-sodium-temperature-higher-than-cladding-temperature]

14.4.3.4.1.4. No Liquid Sodium Films Present and Sodium Temperature Higher Than Cladding Temperature

If $\theta_{\text{cl,fm}} = 0$ , $T_{\text{Na}} > T_{\text{cl,os}}$ ,
and $\alpha_{\text{Na}} > \text{CIVOID}$ 

$$h_{\text{Na,cl}} = \text{CFNACN} \cdot \text{CFNACL}$$ [eq 14.4-106]

i.e., the sodium vapor condensation heat transfer is not decreased with
increasing void fraction.

Since the calculation of the heat transfer between sodium and cladding
is quite complicated, an overview is given in Table 14.4.1.

[anchor: heat-transfer-between-sodium-and-structure]

14.4.3.4.1.5. Heat Transfer Between Sodium and Structure

The calculation of the heat-transfer coefficient between sodium and
structure, $h_{\text{Na,sr}}$ , is based on the same
equations as indicated in Table 14.4.1. This table should be slightly
modified by replacing $T_{\text{cl,os}}$ by
 $T_{\text{sr,os}}$ and by replacing “Na film present on
cladding” by “Na film present on structure” in order to make it
appropriate as an overview for the sodium-to-structure heat-transfer
coefficient.

Heat fluxes per unit of temperature and per unit of generalized smear
volume are later needed in the energy equations. They are calculated
towards the end of subroutine PLMISC and are simply:

$$H_{\text{Na,cl}} = h_{\text{Na,cl}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{cl}}$$ [eq 14.4-107]

$$H_{\text{Na,sr}} = h_{\text{Na,sr}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{sr}}$$ [eq 14.4-108]

[anchor: friction-coefficient-when-no-liquid-sodium-film-is-present]

14.4.3.4.1.6. Friction Coefficient When No Liquid Sodium Film is Present

Friction coefficients for calculating the friction on the sodium/gas
mixture have already been given for the situation when much liquid
sodium is present in the channels Eq. (14.4-93) and for the case when
liquid sodium films are still present Eq. (14.4-101).

When no liquid films are present, Eq. (14.4-101) leads to:

$$F_{\text{Mi}} = \text{AFRV} \cdot \left( \text{Re}_{\text{Mi}} \right)^{\text{BFRV}}$$ [eq 14.4-109]

This equation is appropriate for the particulate fuel flow regime. In
the annular fuel flow regime, the momentum exchange between the moving
fuel film and the sodium/gas mixture is included in the drag term, which
describes this momentum exchange. Thus, the friction of the mixture due
to the interaction with the stationary cladding or fuel crust has to be
reduced from that of the whole channel perimeter.

$$F_{\text{Mi}} = \text{AFRV} \cdot \left( \text{Re}_{\text{Mi}} \right)^{\text{BFRV}} \cdot \left( 1 - \text{CFMFCL} - \text{CFMFFF} \cdot \text{CFFFCL} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-110]

where the quantities in the parentheses (CFMFCL, CFMFFF and CFFFCL)
are explained in Eq. (14.4-120), Eq. (14.4-83), and Eq. (14.4-86).

Table 14.4.1 Overview of the Calculation of the Sodium-to-Cladding Heat Transfer

 | 
Void Fraction
 | 
 | 
Equation
 | 

 | 
 $\alpha_{\text{Na}} < \text{CIVOID}$ 
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-89) (Single-Phase Correlation)
 | 

 | 
 $\text{CIVOID} \leq \alpha_{\text{Na}} \leq \text{CIA4}$ 
 | 
 | 
If liquid Na film present on cladding (only F.R. = 1):

For $T_{\text{Na}} > T_{\text{cl,os}}$ Eq. (14.4-99)

For $T_{\text{Na}} < T_{\text{cl,os}}$ Eq. (14.4-100)

If no liquid Na film left (F.R. = 1 or F.R. = 3):

For $T_{\text{Na}} > T_{\text{cl,os}}$ Eq. (14.4-106)

For $T_{\text{Na}} < T_{\text{cl,os}}$ Eq. (14.4-102)

 | 

 | 
 $\text{CIA4} < \alpha_{\text{Na}} < 1$ 
 | 
 | 
If liquid Na film present on cladding (only F.R. = 1):

For $T_{\text{Na}} > T_{\text{cl,os}}$ Eq. (14.4-99)

For $T_{\text{Na}} < T_{\text{cl,os}}$ Eq. (14.4-100)

If no liquid Na film (F.R. = 1 or F.R. = 3):

For $T_{\text{Na}} > T_{\text{cl,os}}$ Eq. (14.4-106)

For $T_{\text{Na}} < T_{\text{cl,os}}$ Eq. (14.4-103)

 | 

 | 
 $\alpha_{\text{Na}} = 1$ 
 | 
 | 
If $T_{\text{Na}} > T_{\text{cl,os}}$ Eq. (14.4-106)

If $T_{\text{Na}} < T_{\text{cl,os}}$ Eq. (14.4-106)

 | 

[anchor: fuel-to-coolant-heat-transfer]

#### 14.4.3.4.2. Fuel-to-Coolant Heat Transfer

[anchor: fuel-to-coolant-heat-transfer-in-the-particulate-fuel-flow-regime]

14.4.3.4.2.1. Fuel-to-Coolant Heat Transfer in the Particulate Fuel Flow Regime

The heat flow rate per unit of temperature and unit of generalized smear
volume is calculated from

$$H_{\text{fu,Na}} = h_{\text{fu,N1}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{Pa}} \cdot f_{\text{fu,N1}} + h_{\text{fu,vg}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{Pa}} \left( 1 - f_{\text{fu,N1}} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-111]

where $f_{\text{fu,N1}}$ is the fraction of fuel which is in
contact with liquid sodium which is discussed below. The
 ${A'}_{\text{Pa}}$ was discussed in Eq. (14.4-72). The above
heat-transfer coefficient between fuel and liquid sodium is based on the
original Cho-Wright model which considered only the thermal resistance
in the fuel [14-9]:

$$h_{\text{fu,N1}} = \text{CIA1} \cdot \frac{k_{\text{fu}}}{r_{\text{Pa}}}$$ [eq 14.4-112]

where

 $\text{CIA1}$ is an input constant. A value of 1.0 is recommended based on the L8
and H6 analyses [14-15, 14-12, 14-6]. However, when Eq. (14.4-112) is
compared to analytical solutions, a value between 3 and 5 would be
appropriate [14-51].

 $r_{\text{Pa}}$ is the radius of the fuel particles or droplets (see
input quantities RAFPLA and RAFPSM)

The heat-transfer coefficient between fuel particles and a vapor/gas
mixture is calculated from:

$$\frac{1}{h_{\text{fu,vg}}} = \frac{1}{h_{1}} + \frac{\left( r_{\text{Pa}} \cdot 0.1 \right)}{k_{\text{fu}}}$$ [eq 14.4-113]

where the heat-transfer coefficient $h_{1}$ , which determines the
heat transfer between the fuel surface and the vapor/gas mixture is
based on Ref. 14-22 and a Prandtl number of 0.7

$$h_{1} = \frac{k_{\text{vg}}}{2r_{\text{Pa}}} \left\lbrack 2.0 + 0.54 \cdot \left( \frac{2r_{\text{Pa}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} \
 - u_{\text{fu}} \right| \cdot \rho_{\text{vg}}}{\mu_{\text{vg}}} \right)^{1/2} \right\rbrack$$ [eq 14.4-114]

where

 $\mu_{\text{vg}} = \text{VIVG}$ , viscosity of the vapor/gas mixture which is input

 $\rho_{\text{vg}} = \rho_{\text{Nv}} + \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fi}}}{\theta_{\text{vg}}}$ 

The heat-transfer coefficient $h_{\text{fuvg}}$ considers only 1/10 of
the possible heat resistance in the fuel particles. This is because the
heat capacity of a vapor/gas mixture is so low that only the outer skin
of the particles will be affected by the heat loss of the vapor.

The particle surface area per unit of generalized smear volume is

$${A'}_{\text{Pa}} = {N'}_{\text{Pa}} \cdot 4 \pi r_{\text{Pa}}^{2}$$ [eq 14.4-115]

 ${N'}_{\text{Pa}}$ = number of fuel particles in a generalized
smear volume (see Eq. (14.4-72))

The contact fraction between fuel and liquid sodium is calculated in the
following way:

$$f_{\text{fu,N1}} = \left( \frac{\theta_{\text{N1}}}{\theta_{\text{ch,op}}} \right)^{\text{CIA2}}$$ [eq 14.4-116]

where

 $\text{CIA2}$ is an input constant. A value of 2.0 is recommended based on the H6
and L8 analysis [14-15, 14-12, 14-6]. A value of 1.0 appears to be too
low, because it implies that the liquid sodium appears to be too low,
because it implies that the liquid sodium in a partially voided node is
heated at the same rate as if the cell were full of sodium. This is
because both the effective fuel surface area and the sodium mass (and
thus, the sodium heat capacity) are reduced by the same factor in this
case.

When the fuel vapor pressure of the moving fuel is above $10^{-2}$ 
MPa, fuel vapor condensation on liquid sodium is considered. The heat
flow rate per unit of temperature and unit of generalized smear volume
is

$$\begin{split} H_{\text{fv,N1}} = \begin{cases}
 0 & \text{if } P_{\text{fv}} < 10^{-2} \text{MPa} \\
 \left\lbrack \text{CFCOFV} \cdot \left( f \cdot {A'}_{\text{cl}} + {A'}_{\text{sr}} \right) \cdot \frac{\theta_{\text{vg}}}{\theta_{\text{ch,op}} - \theta_{\text{Na,fm}}} \right\rbrack & \text{if } P_{\text{fv}} > 10^{-2} \text{ MPa} \\
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-117]

where

 $P_{\text{fv}}$ = fuel vapor pressure

 $\text{CFCOFV}$ = fuel vapor condensation coefficient which is input

 $f$ = is a multiplier which is zero when $\theta_{\text{fm,cl}} = 0$ and 1
when $\theta_{\text{fm,cl}} > 0$ 

 $h_{\text{fu,Nl}}$ and ${A'}_{\text{Pa}}$ are described in
Eq. (14.4-112) and Eq. (14.4-115).

This is a rather simple formulation that is at the one extreme limited
by the condensation on liquid sodium and at the other extreme by the
heat resistance in the fuel droplets.

[anchor: fuel-to-coolant-heat-transfer-in-the-annular-fuel-flow-regime]

14.4.3.4.2.2. Fuel-to-Coolant Heat Transfer in the Annular Fuel Flow Regime

In this fuel flow regime, the contact area between the fuel and the
sodium is significantly reduced from that in the particulate regime. The
heat flow rate per unit of temperature and per unit of generalized smear
volume is calculated from

$$H_{\text{fu,Na}} = {A'}_{\text{fu}} \cdot \left( \frac{1}{\frac{1}{h_{1}} + \frac{1}{h_{2}}} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-118]

where

 ${A'}_{\text{fu}}$ is the surface area of the molten fuel film per unit
of the generalized smear volume which is calculated from:

$${A'}_{\text{fu}} = \left( {A'}_{\text{cl}} + {A'}_{\text{sr}} \right) \cdot \left( \text{CFMFCL} + \text{CFFFCL} \cdot \text{CFMFFF} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-119]

where

$$\text{CFMFCL} = \text{CFFUCL} - \text{CFFFCL}$$ [eq 14.4-120]

i.e., CFMFCL is the fraction of the cladding covered by molten fuel.
Regarding CFFUCL, see Eq. (14.4-78); for CFFFCL, see Eq. (14.4-86).

CFMFFF = fraction of the frozen fuel perimeter covered by molten fuel
(see Eq. (14.4-83)).

The term $h_{1}$ in Eq. (14.4-118) is the heat-transfer coefficient
between the bulk of the moving fuel film and the surface of the moving
film. It is based on the Deissler correlation [14-23, 14-22] and it is
very similar to Eq. (14.4-29), except that a different hydraulic diameter
and a different Reynolds number are used (see derivation of
Eq. (14.4-30)).

$$h_{1} = \frac{1}{D_{\text{fu}}} \cdot \mu_{\text{fu,liq}} \cdot C_{\text{p,fu}} \cdot \text{CIA3} \left( \text{Re}_{\text{fu,Mi}} \right)^{0.8}$$ [eq 14.4-121]

where

 $\mu_{\text{fu,liq}}$ = liquid fuel viscosity for which the
input constant VIFULQ is used

 $C_{\text{p,fu}}$ = liquid fuel specific heat for which the
input constant CPFU is used

 $\text{CIA3}$ = input constant (see Eq. (14.2-36))

$$D_{\text{fu}} = \frac{4 \cdot \text{ARMF}}{\left( \text{PECH} \cdot \text{CFFUCL} \right)}$$ [eq 14.4-122]

where

 $\text{ARMF}$ = cross-sectional area of moving fuel per pin (see Eq. (14.4-75))

 $\text{PECH}$ = channel perimeter associated with one pin (see Eq. (14.4-77))

 $\text{CFFUCL}$ = fraction of the channel perimeter covered by fuel (see Eq. (14.4-78))

$$\text{Re}_{\text{fu,Mi}} = \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fu}}}{\theta_{\text{fu}}} \cdot \frac{\left| u_{\text{Mi,i}}
 - u_{\text{fu,i}} \right| + \left| u_{\text{Mi,i+1}} - u_{\text{fu,i+1}} \right|}{2} \cdot \frac{D_{\text{fu}}}{\mu_{\text{fu,liq}}}$$ [eq 14.4-123]

The value of the heat-transfer coefficient $h_{2}$ in Eq. (14.4-118)
for sodium void fractions less than the input value CIA4 is

$$h_{2} = \text{HCFFMI} \text{ for } \alpha_{\text{Na}} < \text{CIA4}$$ [eq 14.4-124]

where

HCFFMI is an input variable which is the convective heat-transfer
coefficient between the moving fuel film surface and the sodium
droplet/vapor gas mixture

For sodium void fractions larger than CIA4, an interpolation between
the above value and a heat-transfer coefficient between the fuel film
and a pure vapor/gas mixture is done similarly to the one in
Eq. (14.4-103):

For $\alpha_{\text{Na}} > \text{CIA4}$ 

$$h_{2} = \frac{\left\lbrack \text{HCFFMI} \cdot \left( 1 - \alpha_{\text{Na}} \right)
 + h_{\text{vg,fu}} \left( \alpha_{\text{Na}} - \text{CIA4} \right) \right\rbrack}{\left( 1 - \text{CIA4} \right)}$$ [eq 14.4-125]

 $\alpha_{\text{Na}}$ = sodium void fraction

CIA4 = input void fraction above which the above interpolation
14.4-103 is done. In the L8 and H6 analyses [14-15, 14-12] a value of
0.5 was used for CIA4, because no other option was available at that
time. Using a higher CIA4 should boost the pure vapor/gas temperatures
which appeared to be on the low side in the L8 and H6 analyses. A higher
value may actually lead to a better agreement with the downward voiding
observed in the L8 experiment.

 $h_{\text{vg,fu}}$ = is the heat transfer coefficient between the
vapor/gas mixture and the mobile fuel which is based on the same
Dittus-Boelter correlation as used for $h_{\text{vg,cl}}$ (see
Eq. (14.4-104)).

$$h_{\text{vg,fu}} = 0.02 \cdot \frac{k_{\text{vg}}}{D_{\text{Mi}}} \cdot \left( \text{Re}_{\text{vg,fu}} \right)^{0.8}$$ [eq 14.4-126]

where

$$\text{Re}_{\text{vg,fu}} = \frac{D_{\text{Mi}} \cdot \rho_{\text{vg}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi,i}}
 - u_{\text{fu,i}} + u_{\text{Mi,i+1}} - u_{\text{fu,i+1}} \right|}{\text{VIVG} \cdot 2}$$ [eq 14.4-127]

 $\rho_{\text{vg}} = \begin{cases}
\rho_{\text{Nv}} + \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fi}}}{\theta_{\text{vg}}} & \text{for } \alpha_{\text{Na}} < 1 \\
\frac{{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{\left( \theta_{\text{ch,op}} - \theta_{\text{fu}} \right)} & \text{for } \alpha_{\text{Na}} = 1 \\
\end{cases}$ 

 $\text{VIVG}$ = viscosity of the vapor/gas mixture which is input

 $D_{\text{Mi}}$ = hydraulic diameter for the mixture flow

Eq. (14.4-126) comes from the Dittus-Boelter equation in which a
Prandtl number to the power 0.4 appears [14-50]. Since Prandtl numbers
for gases are in a narrow range and since the exponent of the Prandtl
number further minimizes the dependency of the heat transfer on Prandtl
numbers, an average Prandtl number of 0.686 is used to arrive at
Eq. (14.4-127).

The fuel vapor to the sodium/gas mixture heat flow rate term per unit of
temperature and unit of smear volume is assumed to be limited by the
heat resistance in the molten fuel film:

$$\begin{split} H_{\text{fv,Na}} = \begin{cases}
 0 & \text{if } P_{\text{fv}} < 10^{-2} \text{ MPa} \\
 h_{1} \cdot {A'}_{\text{fu}} & \text{if } P_{\text{fv}} > 10^{-2} \text{ MPa}
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-128]

 $h_{1}, {A'}_{\text{fu}}$ are described in Eq. (14.4-118) and Eq. (14.4-119)

[anchor: fuel-crust-to-sodium-fission-gas-heat-transfer-for-the-case-of-particulate-or-annular-fuel-flow-regime]

14.4.3.4.2.3. Fuel Crust-to-Sodium/Fission-gas Heat Transfer for the Case of Particulate or Annular Fuel Flow Regime

The heat-transfer coefficient between the fuel crust and a two-phase
sodium/fission-gas mixture is calculated from

$$\frac{1}{h_{\text{ff,Mi}}} = \frac{1}{h_{1}} + \frac{\text{TKFF}}{k_{\text{fu}} \cdot 2}$$ [eq 14.4-129]

where

 $\text{TKFF}$ is the frozen fuel crust thickness (see Eq. (14.4-81))

For $\alpha_{\text{Na}} < \text{CIA4},~ h_{1} = \text{HCFFMI}$ (see Eq. (14.4-123))

For $\alpha_{\text{Na}} > \text{CIA4},~ h_{1}$ is based on an interpolation
between HCFFMI and a single-phase gas/vapor heat-transfer coefficient
(see also Eq. (14.4-125))

$$h_{2} = \frac{\left\lbrack \text{HCFFMI} \cdot \left( 1 - \alpha_{\text{Na}} \right)
 + h_{\text{vg,os}} \left( \alpha_{\text{Na}} - \text{CIA4} \right) \right\rbrack}{\left( 1 - \text{CIA4} \right)}$$ [eq 14.4-130]

where

$$h_{\text{vg,os}} = 0.02 \frac{k_{\text{vg}}}{D_{\text{Mi,ff}}} \left( \text{Re}_{\text{vg,ff}} \right)^{0.8}$$ [eq 14.4-131]

where

$$D_{\text{Mi,ff}} = \frac{D_{\text{ch}}}{\left( 1 - \frac{\theta_{\text{ff}}}{\theta_{\text{cf}}} \right)} - 2 \cdot \text{TKFF}$$ [eq 14.4-132]

 $D_{\text{ch}}$ is hydraulic diameter of the open coolant channel (see
Eq. (14.4-61)). By dividing it by the term in the brackets, one gets back
to the original hydraulic diameter.

 $\text{TKFF}$ is the thickness of the frozen fuel crust (see Eq. (14.4-81))

$$\text{Re}_{\text{vg,ff}} = \frac{D_{\text{Mi}} \cdot \rho_{\text{vg}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi,i}}
 + u_{\text{Mi,i+1}} \right|}{\mu_{\text{vg}} \cdot 2}$$ [eq 14.4-133]

The latter Reynolds number calculation is very similar to that in
Eq. (14.4-127) and several variables are explained there.

The fuel crust-to-sodium/fission-gas heat flow rate per unit temperature
and per unit of generalized smear volume is split into a heat transfer
to the crust on the cladding and the crust on the structure because
temperature are calculated for both crusts.

$$H_{\text{ffcl,Na}} = h_{\text{ff,Mi}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{cl}} \cdot \text{CFFFCL} \cdot \left( 1 - \text{CFMFFF} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-134]

$$H_{\text{ffsr,Na}} = h_{\text{ff,Mi}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{sr}} \cdot \text{CFFFCL} \cdot \left( 1 - \text{CFMFFF} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-135]

where

 $\text{CFFFCL}$ is the fraction of the channel perimeter covered by frozen fuel (see Eq. (14.4-86))

 $\text{CFMFFF}$ is the fraction of CFFFCL covered by moving fuel, which is zero
in the particulate fuel flow regime (see Eq. (14.4-83)).

[anchor: fuel-to-sodium-fission-gas-heat-transfer-in-the-bubbly-fuel-flow-regime]

14.4.3.4.2.4. Fuel-to-Sodium/Fission-gas Heat Transfer in the Bubbly Fuel Flow Regime

The description of this heat-transfer process will require some more
investigation. On the one hand, the bubble temperatures should quickly
adjust to the surrounding fuel temperature. On the other hand, if liquid
sodium is entrapped by the bubbly fuel, the achievement of high
temperatures will lead to exaggerated sodium vapor pressures that will
rapidly disperse fuel. This may be realistic but the premise that
significant amounts at liquid sodium can be entrapped by a bubbly fuel
flow is still unclear. Sudden fuel dispersal of denser fuel masses such
as observed in the SLSF experiment P2 [14-52] or in the TREAT tests L3
and L4 [14-53, 14-54] may have been due to non-prototypical lateral
injections of liquid sodium into the molten fuel masses. (However, such
lateral injections of liquid sodium may be prototypical in the
transition phase.) The current heat-transfer calculation in PLUTO2 is
relatively straightforward and can be limited via an input parameter.

For the calculation of the heat transfer between fuel and the
sodium/fission-gas mixture in the bubbly fuel flow regime, an estimate
of the bubble radius is needed. For the maximum bubble radius, it is
assumed that

$$r_{\text{bb,mx}} = D_{\text{Mi}} \cdot 0.5$$

This implies that a string of spherical bubbles is assumed for larger
void fractions, rather than one or a few elongated bubbles. For
decreasing void fractions, the bubble radius is assumed to be:

$$r_{\text{bb}} = r_{\text{bb,mx}} \cdot \left\lbrack 0.05 + \left( 1 - 0.05 \right) \cdot \exp\left( - \frac{1 - \text{CIBBIN} - \alpha_{\text{bb}}}{\alpha_{\text{bb}}} \right) \right\rbrack$$ [eq 14.4-136]

where

 $\text{CIBBIN}$ is the input void fraction above which a bubbly fuel regime can
be initiated.

$$\alpha_{\text{bb}} = \frac{\left( \theta_{\text{ch,op}} - \theta_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\theta_{\text{ch,op}}}$$

When $\alpha_{\text{bb}}$ goes to zero, $r_{\text{bb}}$ goes to
 $r_{\text{bb,mx}} \cdot 0.05$ . This is the assumed minimum bubble radius. For
the heat-transfer coefficient between bubbly fuel and the two-phase
mixture, it is assumed that

$$\frac{1}{h_{\text{fu,Mi}}} = \frac{1}{\text{HCFUBB}} + \frac{r_{\text{bb}}}{k_{\text{Mi}}}$$ [eq 14.4-137]

where

HCFUBB is an input heat-transfer coefficient describing the heat
transfer between the bulk of the fuel and the bubble surfaces. It is
also used to control the heat transfer between fuel vapor and the
mixture (see Eq. (14.4-141)).

and

$$k_{\text{Mi}} = \frac{\theta_{\text{N1}} \cdot \text{CDNL} + \theta_{\text{vg}} \cdot \text{CDVG}}{\theta_{\text{N1}} + \theta_{\text{vg}}}$$ [eq 14.4-138]

where

CDNL, CDVG are input conductivities for liquid sodium and the vapor/fission-gas
mixture, respectively.

The heat flow rate per unit of temperature and unit of generalized smear
volume is:

$$H_{\text{fu,Mi}} = {A'}_{\text{fu,Mi}} \cdot h_{\text{fu,Mi}}$$ [eq 14.4-139]

where

$${A'}_{\text{fu,Mi}} = \frac{3 \cdot \left( \theta_{\text{ch,op}} - \theta_{\text{fu}} \right)}{r_{\text{bb}}}$$ [eq 14.4-140]

which is the total bubble surface area in a unit of smear volume.
 $\left( \theta_{\text{ch,op}} - \theta_{\text{fu}} \right)$ 
is the total bubble volume in a unit of generalized smear volume.

The heat flow rate term between fuel vapor and the bubbles is assumed to
be controlled by the input heat-transfer coefficient HCFUBB

$$\begin{split} H_{\text{fv,Mi}} = \begin{cases}
 0 & \text{for } P_{\text{fv}} < 10^{-2} \text{ MPa} \\
 \text{HCFUBB} \cdot {A'}_{\text{fu,Mi}} & \text{for } P_{\text{fv}} > 10^{-2} \text{MPa}
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-141]

[anchor: moving-fuel-to-cladding-moving-fuel-to-structure-and-moving-fuel-to-fuel-crust-heat-transfer]

#### 14.4.3.4.3. Moving Fuel-to-Cladding, Moving Fuel-to-Structure, and Moving Fuel-to-Fuel-crust Heat Transfer

In the particulate fuel flow regime, no heat transfer between moving
fuel and cladding, structure, or fuel crust is considered. However,
fuel-vapor condensation on cladding and structure is considered when
there is no liquid sodium film left on the cladding or structure. The
heat flow rates per unit of temperature and per unit of generalized
smear volume are

$$\begin{split}H_{\text{fv,cl}} = \begin{cases}
\begin{aligned}
0 && \text{if } P_{\text{fv}} < 10^{-2} \text{ MPa} && \text{or } \theta_{\text{fm,cl}} = 0 \\
\text{CFCOFV} \cdot {A'}_{\text{c1}} \cdot \text{CFNACL} && \text{if } P_{\text{fv}} > 10^{-2} \text{ MPa} && \text{and } \theta_{\text{fm,cl}} > 0
\end{aligned}
\end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-142]

$$\begin{split} H_{\text{fv,sr}} = \begin{cases}
 \begin{aligned}
 0 && \text{if } P_{\text{fv}} < 10^{-2} \text{ MPa} && \text{or } \theta_{\text{fm,sr}} = 0 \\
 \text{CFCOFV} \cdot {A'}_{\text{sr}} \cdot \text{CFNACL} && \text{if } P_{\text{fv}} > 10^{-2} \text{ MPa} && \text{and } \theta_{\text{fm,sr}} > 0
 \end{aligned}
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-143]

where

 $\text{CFNACL} = 1 - \text{CFFFCL}$ (see Eq. (14.4-83))

 $\text{CFCPOFV}$ = fuel vapor condensation coefficient, which is input.

In the annular and bubbly fuel flow regimes, very similar expressions
are used for the heat flow rate terms. The difference lies in the
different values for the contact coefficients and the Reynolds numbers
that are used.

The heat-transfer coefficient for the moving fuel-to-cladding and moving
fuel-to-structure coefficient is the same and it is also used for the
calculation of the moving fuel-to-fuel-crust heat transfer. It is based
on the Deissler correlation [14-23, 14-22] which was already discussed
earlier (see Eq. (14.4-29)). However, a conduction term was added to this
correlation because it is not designed for very slow or stagnant flow
conditions. For the partial or fully annular fuel flow, the following
relationship holds:

$$h_{\text{fu,cl}} = \frac{1}{D_{\text{fu}}} \cdot \text{CIA3} \cdot \text{VIFULQ} \cdot \text{CPFU} \cdot \left( \text{Re}_{\text{fu}} \right)^{0.8} + 2\frac{k_{\text{fu}}}{\text{TKFU}}$$ [eq 14.4-144]

where

TKFU is the thickness of the moving fuel film (see Eq. (14.4-80)). In
the above equation, this film thickness is not allowed to become smaller
than 1/10 of the channel hydraulic diameter. Thus, the additional term
will not dominate the equation except for very slow or stagnant flow
conditions.

CIA3, VIFULQ, CPFU are all input constants, which were explained in Eq. (14.4-29).

 $D_{\text{fu}}$ is the hydraulic diameter of moving fuel film (see Eq. (14.4-121)).

$$\text{Re}_{\text{fu}} = \frac{\rho_{\text{fu}} \cdot D_{\text{fu}} \cdot |u_{\text{fu,i}} + u_{\text{fu,i+1}}|}{\mu_{\text{fu,liq}} \cdot 2}$$ [eq 14.4-145]

In the bubbly fuel flow regime, pretty much the same form of the
heat-transfer coefficient is used. However, some of the terms are
evaluated differently:

 $D_{\text{fu}} = D_{\text{ch}}$ 

 $\text{TKFU} = \frac{D_{\text{ch}}}{4}$ 

where $D_{\text{cg}}$ is the open channel hydraulic diameter, which takes
the frozen crusts into account (see Eq. (14.4-61) and Eq. (14.4-71)).

If the energy of the moving fuel film is below the solidus energy, which
is possible if solid fuel gets released from an underlying melting
cladding, only the pure conduction part of Eq. (14.4-144) will be used.
The thickness TKFU is, in this case, always calculated from Eq. (14.4-80)
and no lower limit is assumed for it as in Eq. (14.4-144). The calculation
of this special heat-transfer coefficient and of the related heat flow
rates are performed near the end of PLMISC, whereas the regular
coefficients and flow rates are done in the middle section of PLMISC.

The heat flow rates per unit temperature and per unit of generalized
smear volume are

$$H_{\text{fu,cl}} = h_{\text{fu,c}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{cl}} \cdot \text{CFMFCL}$$ [eq 14.4-146]

and

$$H_{\text{fu,sr}} = h_{\text{fu,cl}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{sr}} \cdot \text{CFMFCL}$$ [eq 14.4-147]

where

$$\text{CFMFCL} = 1 - \text{CFFUCL} - \text{CFFFCL}$$ [eq 14.4-148]

CFMFCL is the fraction of the channel perimeter covered with moving
fuel (see Eq. (14.4-78) and Eq. (14.4-83)). In the case of the bubbly fuel flow
regime.

$$\text{CFMFCL} = 1 - \text{CFFFCL}$$ [eq 14.4-149]

because all the structure or cladding which is not covered by frozen
fuel is assumed to be in contact with moving fuel in this case.

For the fuel vapor condensation on cladding and structure, heat flow
rate terms per unit temperature and per unit smear volume are used which
are similar to Eq. (14.4-142) and Eq. (14.4-143):

$$\begin{split} H_{\text{fv,cl}} = \begin{cases}
 0 & \text{if } P_{\text{fv}} < 10^{-2} \text{ MPa} \\
 \text{CFCOFV} \cdot {A'}_{\text{cl}} \cdot \text{CFN} \text{ACL} & \text{if } P_{\text{fv}} > 10^{-2} \text{ MPa}
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-150]

$$\begin{split} H_{\text{fv,cl}} = \begin{cases}
 0 & \text{if } P_{\text{fv}} < 10^{-2} \text{ MPa} \\
 \text{CFCOFV} \cdot {A'}_{\text{cl}} \cdot \text{CFNACL} & \text{if } P_{\text{fv}} > 10^{-2} \text{ MPa}
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-151]

where

 $\text{CFNACL} = 1 - \text{CFFUCL}$ (see Eq. (14.4-78))

The heat-transfer coefficient between moving fuel and a frozen fuel
crust is calculated form

$$\frac{1}{h_{\text{hu,ff}}} = \frac{1}{h_{\text{fu,cl}}} + \frac{2 \cdot k_{\text{fu}}}{\text{TKFF}}$$ [eq 14.4-152]

where

TKFF = the thickness of the frozen fuel crust (see Eq. (14.4-81) and Eq. (14.4-85)).

 $k_{\text{fu}} = \text{CDFU}$ which is the input fuel conductivity

The heat flow rates per unit temperature and per unit of smear volume
for the annular flow regimes are

$$H_{\text{fu,ffcl}} = h_{\text{fu,ff}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{cl}} \cdot \text{CFFFCL} \cdot \text{CFMFFF}$$ [eq 14.4-153]

$$H_{\text{fu,ffsr}} = h_{\text{fu,ff}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{sr}} \cdot \text{CFFFCL} \cdot \text{CFMFFF}$$ [eq 14.4-154]

where

 $\text{CFFFCL}$ : see Eq. (14.4-83)

 $\text{CFMFFF}$ : see Eq. (14.4-134)

In the bubbly fuel flow regime

$$H_{\text{fu,ffcl}} = h_{\text{fu,ff}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{cl}} \cdot \text{CFFFCL}$$ [eq 14.4-155]

$$H_{\text{fu,ffsr}} = h_{\text{fu,ff}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{sr}} \cdot \text{CFFFCL}$$ [eq 14.4-156]

All the frozen fuel is assumed to be covered with moving fuel in the
bubbly flow regime. Therefore, CFMFFF is 1.0 in this case.

The multiplication with the A’s in the above equations is not done in
subroutine PLMISC, but in PLTECS which is called next in the calling
sequence.

[anchor: partial-momentum-exchange-terms-between-annular-fuel-and-the-sodium-fission-gas-mixture]

### 14.4.3.5. Partial Momentum exchange Terms Between Annular Fuel and the Sodium/Fission-gas Mixture

The friction coefficient CFFRMF for the calculation of the drag
between a moving fuel film and the sodium/gas mixture is calculated from

$$\text{CFFRMF} = \text{AFRV} \cdot \left( \text{Re}_{\text{Mi,fu}} \right)^{\text{BFRV}} \cdot \left( \text{CFMFCL} + \text{CFFFCL} \cdot \text{CFMFFF} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-157]

where

 $\text{AFRV, BFRV}$ = input constants

$$\text{Re}_{\text{mi,fu}} = \frac{D_{\text{ch}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}}
 - u_{\text{fu}} \right| \cdot {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{\text{VIVG} \cdot \left( \theta_{\text{vg}} + \theta_{\text{N1}} \right)}$$ [eq 14.4-158]

 $\text{CFMFCL} = \text{CFFUCL} - \text{CFFFCL}$ 

 $\text{CFFUCL}$ : see Eq. (14.4-78)

 $\text{CFFFCL}$ : see Eq. (14.4-86)

 $\text{CFMFFF}$ : see Eq. (14.4-83)

In subroutine PLMISC, a contact coefficient that gives the fraction of
the cladding and fuel crust in contact with the moving fuel is also set.
It is needed in PLMOCO for the calculation of the fuel friction term.
In the annular fuel flow regime, it is:

$$\text{CTFRFU} = \text{CFMFCL} + \text{CFMFFF} \cdot \text{CFFFCL}$$ [eq 14.4-159]

The terms on the right-hand side of this equation were also used in Eq. (14.4-157).

If the bubbly fuel flow regime holds:

$$\text{CTFRFU} = 1$$ [eq 14.4-160]

[anchor: mobile-fuel-and-fuel-crust-energy-equations]

## 14.4.4. Mobile Fuel and Fuel Crust Energy Equations

[anchor: mobile-fuel-energy-equation]

### 14.4.4.1. Mobile Fuel Energy Equation

The mobile fuel energy equation, which is solved at the end of
subroutine PLMISC, includes only source and sink terms due to heat
transfer. The energy changes due to fuel plateout and the energy changes
due to the addition of released or remelting fuel crusts are taken into
account in subroutine PLFREZ which was discussed in Section 14.4.3.2.
The energy change due to the addition of fuel ejected from the pins is
taken into account in subroutine PL1PIN.

The mobile fuel energy equation in differential form reads:

$$\begin{split} \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}} \left( \rho_{\text{fu}} e_{\text{fu}} A_{\text{fu}} + \rho_{\text{fv}} e_{\text{fv}} A_{\text{vg}} \right) + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( \rho_{\text{fu}} e_{\text{fu}} u_{\text{fu}} A_{\text{fu}} + \rho_{\text{fv}} e_{\text{fv}} u_{\text{Mi}} A_{\text{vg}} \right) \\
 = - \sum_{\text{k}}{h_{\text{fu,k}} A_{\text{fu,k}}^{l}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{\text{k}} \right) \\
 - \sum_{\text{l}}{h_{\text{fv,l}} A_{\text{fv,l}}^{l}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{l} \right) + Q \cdot \left( A_{\text{fu}} \rho_{\text{fu}} + A_{\text{vg}} \rho_{\text{fv}} \right) \\\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-161]

where

 $A_{\text{fu}}, A_{\text{vg}}$ = cross sectional areas of the mobile
liquid or solid fuel and of the vapor/gas mixture, respectively

 $A_{\text{fu,k}}^{l}$ = interaction area between moving
fuel and component $k$ per unit length

 $A_{\text{fv},l}^{l}$ = interaction areas
between fuel vapor and component $l$ per unit length

 $\rho_{\text{fv}}$ = saturated fuel vapor density

 $\rho_{\text{fu}}$ = theoretical density of liquid or solid fuel

 $e_{\text{fu}}$ = internal energy of liquid or solid fuel

$$e_{\text{fv}} = e_{\text{fu}} + \lambda_{\text{fv}}$$ [eq 14.4-162]

 $\lambda_{\text{fv}}$ = fuel heat of vaporization

 $Q$ = fission heat source per kg of fuel that is calculated from
Eq. (14.4-26).

However, $F_{\text{POWER}}$ is always 1 in this case.

By inserting Eq. (14.4-162) into the first term of Eq. (14.4-161), one
obtains:

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}} \left( \right) = \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}} \left\lbrack \left( \rho_{\text{fu}} A_{\text{fu}} \
 + \rho_{\text{fv}} A_{\text{vg}} \right) \cdot e_{\text{fu}} + \rho_{\text{fv}} A_{\text{vg}} \lambda_{\text{fv}} \right\rbrack$$ [eq 14.4-163]

By inserting Eq. (14.4-163) into Eq. (14.4-161) and dividing the resulting
equation by AXMS, and by also using the definitions of the generalized
smear densities, one arrives at:

$$\begin{split} \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} e_{\text{fu}} \right) + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fv}} \lambda_{\text{fv}} \right) + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fu}} e_{\text{fu}} u_{\text{fu}} + {\rho'}_{\text{fv}} e_{\text{fv}} u_{\text{Mi}} \right) \\
 = - \sum_{\text{k}}{h_{\text{fu,k}} {A'}_{\text{fu,k}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{\text{k}} \right) - \sum_{l}h_{\text{fv},l}}{A'}_{\text{fu,k}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{l} \right) + Q {\rho'}_{\text{fu}} \\\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-164]

where

 ${\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} = {\rho'}_{\text{fu}} = {\rho'}_{\text{fv}}$ 

 ${\rho'}_{\text{fu}}$ = generalized smear density of the moving
liquid or solid fuel

 ${\rho'}_{\text{fv}}$ = generalized smear density of fuel vapor

 ${A'}_{\text{fu,k}}$ = interaction area between moving liquid or
solid fuel and component $k$ in a unit of generalized smear volume

 ${A'}_{\text{fv},l}$ = interaction area between fuel
vapor and component $l$ in a unit of generalized smear volume

The different heat flow rates which are summed up in Eq. (14.4-164) can be
written as:

 $H_{\text{fu,na}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{\text{Ta}} \right)$ : see
Eq. (14.4-111) for particulate fuel flow and Eq. (14.4-118) for annular flow
and Eq. (14.4-139) for bubbly flow

 $H_{\text{fu,cl}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{\text{cl,os}} \right)$ :
see Eq. (14.4-146) and Eq. (14.4-148). For particulate flow this term is zero.

 $H_{\text{fu,sr}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{\text{sr,os}} \right)$ :
see Eq. (14.4-147) and Eq. (14.4-148). For particulate flow this term is also zero.

 $H_{\text{fu,ffcl}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{\text{ffcl}} \right)$ :
see Eq. (14.4-153), Eq. (14.4-155)

 $H_{\text{fu,ffsr}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{\text{ffsr}} \right)$ :
see Eq. (14.4-154), Eq. (14.4-156)

 $H_{\text{fv,N1}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{\text{Na}} \right)$ :
see Eq. (14.4-117), Eq. (14.4-128), and Eq. (14.4-141)

 $H_{\text{fv,cl}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{\text{cl,os}} \right)$ :
see Eq. (14.4-209) and Eq. (14.4-152); in the bubbly flow regime this term is zero

 $H_{\text{fv,sr}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{\text{sr,os}} \right)$ :
see Eq. (14.4-143) and Eq. (14.4-151); in the bubbly flow regime this term is zero

where $H$ is heat transfer coefficient times heat transfer area.

The main part of the energy equation for the moving fuel is solved at
the end of subroutine PLMISC. However, heat-transfer terms between
moving fuel and the frozen crust on cladding and structure are only
included in subroutine PLTECS which is called after PLMISC.

Since the moving fuel energy equation is solved explicitly (i.e., using
only beginning-of-time step values in the convective terms and in the
heat-transfer terms), it is possible to solve this equation for the fuel
energy rather than for fuel temperature. This has the advantage that the
heat of fusion can be easily taken into account. The moving fuel energy
is stored in a permanent array in PLUTO2, and fuel temperatures,
which are needed in the heat-transfer terms and for calculating fuel
vapor pressure, are obtained from function subroutine TEFUEG. The
equations solved in this subroutine are the following:

If $e_{\text{fu}} < e_{\text{fu},\text{sol}}$ 

$$C_{\text{p,fu}} = \text{CPFU}$$ [eq 14.4-165]

$$T_{\text{fu}} = T_{\text{fu,sol}} - \frac{\left( e_{\text{fu,sol}} - e_{\text{fu}} \right)}{C_{\text{p,fu}}}$$ [eq 14.4-166]

If $e_{\text{fu,sol}} < e_{\text{fu}} < e_{\text{fu,liq}}$ 

$$C_{\text{p,fu}} = \frac{\left( e_{\text{fu,liq}} - e_{\text{fu,sol}} \right)}{\left( T_{\text{fu,liq}} - T_{\text{fu,sol}} \right)}$$ [eq 14.4-167]

$$T_{\text{fu}} = T_{\text{fu,sol}} + \frac{\left( e_{\text{fu}} - e_{\text{fu,sol}} \right)}{C_{\text{p,fu}}}$$ [eq 14.4-168]

If $e_{\text{fu,liq}} < e_{\text{fu}}$ 

$$C_{\text{p,fu}} = \text{CPFU}$$ [eq 14.4-169]

$$T_{\text{fu}} = T_{\text{fu,liq}} + \frac{\left( e_{\text{fu}} - e_{\text{fu,liq}} \right)}{C_{\text{p,fu}}}$$ [eq 14.4-170]

The function subroutine TEFUEG is called in subroutine PLSET2, which is
called whenever control is transferred to PLUTO2 and which sets all
temporary arrays such as the fuel temperature. Moreover, it is called
for all nodes containing fuel at the end of subroutine PLTECS after
nearly all the updating of the moving fuel energy has been done. In
nodes receiving fuel that is ejected from the pins, the fuel energy is
further updated and function subroutine TEFUEG is used again for further
updating the fuel temperatures in such nodes.

For the numerical solution of Eq. (14.4-164), the main storage term is
rewritten:

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} e_{\text{fu}} \right) \
 = {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} \cdot \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}} e_{\text{fu}} \
 + \frac{\partial{\rho'}_{\text{fuch}}}{\partial \text{t}} \cdot e_{\text{fu}}$$ [eq 14.4-171]

In finite difference form, the above equation is written as

$$\frac{\Delta\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} e_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\Delta t} \
 = {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}}^{n + 1} \cdot \frac{\Delta e_{\text{fu}}}{\Delta t} \
 + e_{\text{fu}}^{n} \cdot \frac{\Delta{\rho'}_{\text{fuch}}}{\Delta t}$$ [eq 14.4-172]

which can be arrived at by writing

$$\Delta\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} e_{\text{fu}} \right) \
= \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} + \Delta {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} \right) \cdot \left( e_{\text{fu}} \
+ \Delta e_{\text{fu}} \right) - {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} \cdot e_{\text{fu}}$$

The derivative of the generalized smear density in Eq. (14.4-172) is

$$\frac{\Delta{\rho'}_{\text{fuch}}}{\Delta t} = - \frac{\Delta \left\lbrack \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} \
 - {\rho'}_{\text{fv}} \right) u_{\text{fu}} \right\rbrack}{\Delta z} \
 - \frac{\Delta\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fv}} u_{\text{Mi}} \right)}{\Delta z}$$ [eq 14.4-173]

which is the fuel mass conservation equation without source or sink
terms. Since the energy Eq. (14.4-164) does not include loss or gain terms
due to mass sinks or sources (these are separately included in the fuel
freezing and crust release calculations in subroutine PLFREZ and in
the fuel ejection calculation in subroutine PLIPIN), the density
changes in Eq. (14.4-164) are solely due to mass convection. By writing
Eq. (14.4-164) in finite difference form and by including Eq. (14.4-172)
and Eq. (14.4-173), one arrives at

$$\begin{split} {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} \frac{\Delta e_{\text{fu}}}{\Delta t} + \lambda_{\text{fv}} \frac{\partial {\rho'}_{\text{fv}}}{\partial \text{T}} \frac{\Delta T}{\Delta t} = e_{\text{fu}} \cdot \frac{\Delta \left( {\rho'}_{\text{pu}} u_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\Delta z} + e_{\text{fu}} \cdot \frac{\Delta \left( {\rho'}_{\text{pv}} u_{\text{Mi}} \right)}{\Delta z} \\
 - \frac{\Delta \left( {\rho'}_{\text{pu}} e_{\text{fu}} u_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\Delta z} - \frac{\Delta \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fv}} e_{\text{fv}} u_{\text{Mi}} \right)}{\Delta z} \\
 + \sum_{\text{k}}{H_{\text{fu,k}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{\text{k}} \right) + \sum_{l} H_{\text{fv},l}} \left( T_{\text{fu}} - T_{l} \right) + {Q'} \rho_{\text{fu}} \\\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-174]

In the second term of the left-hand side, it was assumed that the heat
of vaporization is constant over the range considered (3700-5000 K). The
temperature change in the second term on the left-hand side of
Eq. (14.4-174) can be related to the liquid energy change by

$$\frac{\Delta T}{\Delta t} = \frac{\Delta e_{\text{fu}}}{\Delta t \cdot C_{\text{p,fu}}}$$ [eq 14.4-175]

By using Eq. (14.4-175) in Eq. (14.4-174), the left-hand side of this
equation can be rewritten:

$${\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} \frac{\Delta e_{\text{fu}}}{\Delta t}
 + \lambda_{\text{fu}} \cdot \frac{\partial {\rho'}_{\text{fv}}}{\partial \text{T}} \frac{\Delta T}{\Delta t}
 = \frac{\Delta e_{\text{fu}}}{\Delta t} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} + \frac{\lambda_{\text{fv}}}{C_{\text{p,fu}}}
 \frac{\partial {\rho'}_{\text{fv}}}{\partial \text{T}} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-176]

The convective terms are evaluated by using full donor cell
differencing. The first two terms on the right-hand side are actually
the convective fluxes of the fuel mass conservation equation (see
Eq. (14.4-35)) multiplied by $e_{\text{fu}}$ (note that in Eq. (14.4-35),
 ${\rho'}_{\text{fu}}$ is written as
 ${\rho'}_{\text{fuch}} - {\rho'}_{\text{fv}}$ ). These convective
mass fluxes are used in the energy equation to evaluate the first two
terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (14.4-174). The convective energy flux
of the solid or liquid fuel is evaluated in the following way (see the
schematic below Eq. (14.4-157)).

$$\frac{\Delta\left( {\rho'}_{\text{fu}} e_{\text{fu}} u_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\Delta z_{\text{i}}}
 = \frac{\left\lbrack \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fu}} e_{\text{fu}} u_{\text{fu}} \right)_{\text{i+1/2}}
 - \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fu}} e_{\text{fu}} u_{\text{fu}} \right)_{\text{i-1/2}} \right\rbrack}{\Delta z_{\text{i}}}$$ [eq 14.4-177]

The first term on the right-hand side is evaluated in the following way:

$$\begin{split} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fu}} e_{\text{fu}} u_{\text{fu}} \right)_{\text{i+1/2}} = \begin{cases}
 {\rho'}_{\text{fu,i}} e_{\text{fu,i}} u_{\text{fu,i+1}} & \text{for } u_{\text{fu,i+1}} > 0 \\
 \rho_{\text{fu,i+1}} e_{\text{fu,i+1}} u_{\text{fu,i+1}} & \text{for } u_{\text{fu,i+1}} < 0
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-178]

The second term on the right-hand side is evaluated correspondingly. The
FORTRAN name for the convective energy fluxes is $\text{COFUOS} \left( I \right)$ . They
are calculated in the subroutine solving the mass conservation
equations, PLMACO. Eq. (14.4-174) is solved for $\Delta e_{\text{fu}}$ 
at the end of subroutine PLMISC. As mentioned earlier, the heat
flow terms between fuel and the frozen crust on the cladding and on the
structure are only later included in subroutine PLTECS, which is
called after PLMISC. After these additional updates to the energy
equations have been made, the fuel temperature is calculated by using
function subroutine TEFUEG (see Eq. (14.4-165)-Eq. (14.4-170)).

[anchor: fuel-crust-energy-equations]

### 14.4.4.2. Fuel Crust Energy Equations

The energy equations for the stationary fuel crusts on the cladding and
structure are solved in subroutine PLTECS (PLUTO2 TEMPERATURE
CALCULATION OF CLADDING AND STRUCTURE). The calculation of the
fuel crust temperatures is done at the beginning of this routine and
provides heat flow rates per unit temperature and unit smear volume for
the cladding and structure calculation which make up the bulk of this
routine and are described in Section 14.5.

Only the temperatures of the fuel crusts on cladding and structure (one
for each crust) are stored in permanent arrays in PLUTO2. The beginning
of time-step energy of the fuel crust on cladding is determined form the
beginning of time-step temperature by

$$\begin{split} e_{\text{ffcl}}^{n} = \begin{cases}
 e_{\text{fu,sol}} - \left( T_{\text{fu,sol}} - T_{\text{ffcl}}^{n} \right) \cdot C_{\text{p,fu}} & \text{for } T_{\text{ffcl}} < T_{\text{fu,sol}} \\
 \text{EGFUTE} \left( T_{\text{ffcl}}^{n} \right) & \text{for } T_{\text{ffcl}} > T_{\text{fu,sol}}
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-179]

where

 $C_{\text{p,fu}} = \text{CPFU}$ which is the input value of the
fuel specific heat.

EGFUTE is a function subroutine to convert form temperatures to energies. It
is could be used over the entire temperature range of the fuel, but by
calling it only for the rare case when the crust is above the solidus
temperature, computer time is save.

The change in the internal energy of the cladding fuel crust per PLUTO2
time step is calculated from:

$$\begin{split} \frac{\Delta e_{\text{ffc1}} \cdot {\rho'}_{\text{fufm}} \cdot f_{\text{ffcl}}}{\Delta t} = Q \cdot {\rho'}_{\text{fufm}} \cdot f_{\text{ffcl}} - H_{\text{ff,Na}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{ffcl}} - T_{\text{Na}} \right) \\
 - H_{\text{ff,fu}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{ffcl}} - T_{\text{fu}} \right) - H_{\text{ff,cl}} \cdot \left( T_{\text{ffcl}} - T_{\text{cl,os}} \right) \\\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-180]

where

 $f_{\text{ffcl}} = \frac{{A'}_{\text{c1}}}{{A'}_{\text{c1}} + {A'}_{\text{sr}}}$ 
is the fraction of all the fuel crust which is on the cladding

 $H_{\text{ff,Na}}$ has been described in Eq. (14.4-134).

 $H_{\text{ff,fu}}$ has been described in Eq. (14.4-135).

$$H_{\text{ff,cl}} = \frac{k_{\text{fu}} \cdot 2}{\text{TKFF}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{cl}} \cdot \text{CFFFCL}$$ [eq 14.4-181]

where

 $\text{TKFF}$ is the thickness of the frozen fuel crust

 $\text{CFFFCL}$ is the fraction of the cladding perimeter covered by fuel crust (see Eq. (14.4-81))

After the new internal energy has been calculated from

$$H_{\text{ff,cl}} = \frac{k_{\text{fu}} \cdot 2}{\text{TKFF}} \cdot {A'}_{\text{cl}} \cdot \text{CFFFCL}$$ [eq 14.4-182]

the new temperature is calculated from

$$\begin{split} T_{\text{ffc1}}^{n + 1} = \begin{cases}
 T_{\text{fu,sol}} - \frac{e_{\text{ffcl}}^{n + 1}}{C_{\text{p,fu}}} & \text{for } e_{\text{ffcl}} < e_{\text{fu,sol}} \\
 \text{TEFUEG} \left( e_{\text{ffcl}}^{n+1} \right) & \text{for } e_{\text{ffcl}} > e_{\text{fu,sol}}
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-183]

The function subroutine TEFUEG for converting from fuel energies to
temperatures is only called for the rate case when the crust energy is
above the solidus energy in order to save computer running time.

The calculation of the structure crust temperature, $T_{\text{ffsr}}$ , is
done correspondingly. In this case, the fraction of the crust that is on
the structure is assumed to be:

$$f_{\text{ffsr}} = \frac{{A'}_{\text{sr}}}{\left( {A'}_{\text{sr}} + {A'}_{\text{cl}} \right)}$$ [eq 14.4-184]

[anchor: sodium-fission-gas-energy-equation-and-channel-pressure-calculation]

## 14.4.5. Sodium/Fission-gas Energy Equation and Channel Pressure Calculation

The subroutine PLNAEN (PLUTO NA ENERGY) which calculates the
sodium temperature change for the two-phase sodium/fission-gas mixture
and the single phase sodium/vapor/fission-gas mixture is nearly the same
as the LEVITATE sodium energy equation (see Section 16.4.3.5) and
therefore is not described in detail here. Only the slight differences
between the two routines will be discussed.

One difference is due to the fact that LEVITATE treats more components
than PLUTO2. These additional components are the moving molten steel
films (designated by subscripts se) and the moving fuel and steel
chunks (designated by subscript f1 and s1, respectively). Because of
the presence of these components, three additional heat-transfer terms
appear in the LEVITATE sodium energy subroutine LENAEN.

Another difference between the two sodium energy equations is due to the
fact that PLUTO2 treats liquid sodium films on the cladding. This has
not yet been incorporated in LEVITATE. In PLUTO2, the convective energy
fluxes for the two-phase sodium/gas mixture use sodium densities and
sodium qualities which exclude the liquid sodium film. The quality of
the moving two-phase mixture in PLUTO2 is

$$x_{\text{Mi}} = \frac{\rho_{\text{Nv}} \cdot \theta_{\text{vg}}}{\left( {\rho'}_{\text{Na}} - {\rho'}_{\text{Na,fm}} \right)}$$ [eq 14.4-185]

In LEVITATE, the sodium quality $x_{\text{Na}}$ is also based on the
above equation, but with ${\rho'}_{\text{Na,fm}} = 0$ in
all nodes. It should be noted here that the liquid film treatment in
PLUTO2 does not come into the energy equation in other ways because the
liquid sodium film is considered to be in thermal equilibrium with the
moving sodium in a node.

Subroutine PLNAEN includes most of the PLUTO2 channel pressure
calculation. However, an updating is done later in subroutine PL1PIN for
cells into which fuel and/or gas is injected. Subroutine PLNAEN includes
the calculation of fission-gas pressure, sodium saturation pressure or
superheated sodium vapor pressure, fuel vapor pressure, and, if
necessary, single-liquid-phase pressure of sodium. LEVITATE does not
treat the latter because it is not important for voided channel
conditions. LEVITATE has a much more refined fuel vapor pressure
calculation than PLUTO2, tub this is not performed in the LEVITATE
sodium energy equation LENAEN. Moreover, LEVITATE treats steel vapor
pressure. But this is also not calculated in LENAEN.

In single-phase liquid sodium pressures do not play a significant role,
PLUTO2 will add up the partial pressures according to Dalton’s law:

$$P_{\text{ch}} = P_{\text{Nv}} \left( T_{\text{Na}} \right)
 + P_{\text{fv}} \left( T_{\text{fu}} \right) + P_{\text{fi}} \left( T_{\text{Na}} \rho_{\text{fi}} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-186]

In the above equation, the fission-gas pressure contribution is based on
the ideal-gas equation (see Eq. (14.4-187) and Eq. (14.4-188)). The fission gas
is assumed to be always in thermal equilibrium with the two-phase sodium
mixture. Therefore, no separate fission-gas temperature appears in the
equation-of-state. For sodium void fractions greater than 70%, the
fission-gas pressure is calculated from the ideal-gas equation:

$$P_{\text{fi}} = \frac{R_{\text{fi}} {\rho'}_{\text{fi}} T_{\text{Na}}}{\theta_{\text{vg,un}}}$$ [eq 14.4-187]

where

 $R_{\text{fi}}$ = RGAS gas constant for fission gas which is the
universal gas constant divided by the averaged molecular weight of
xenon, krypton, and helium (the latter is only important for near-fresh
fuel)

 $\theta_{\text{vg,un}}$ is the generalized volume fraction of the vapor gas
space when the compressibility of liquid sodium is not taken into
account.

For sodium void fractions of less than 70%, the fission-gas pressure
calculation takes the sodium compressibility into account. This is done
by solving the ideal-gas equation which includes the sodium
compressibility:

$$P_{\text{fi}} = \frac{R_{\text{fi}} {\rho'}_{\text{fi}} T_{\text{Na}}}{\theta_{\text{vg,un}}
+ \theta_{\text{N1}} K_{\text{N1}} P_{\text{fi}}}$$

The positive solution of this quadratic equation is

$$P_{\text{fi}} = \frac{- \theta_{\text{vg,un}} + \left\lbrack \theta_{\text{vg,un}}^{2}
 + 4\theta_{\text{N1}} K_{\text{N1}} R_{\text{fi}} T_{\text{Na}} {\rho'}_{\text{fi}}
 \right\rbrack^{1/2}}{2 \cdot \theta_{\text{N1}} K_{\text{N1}}}$$ [eq 14.4-188]

where

 $K_{\text{N1}} = \text{CMNL}$ , the adiabatic liquid sodium compressibility

 $\theta_{\text{N1}}$ = generalized volume fraction of liquid sodium

This equation will default to a pure liquid phase equation if the
fission-gas density is zero and the $\theta_{\text{vg,un}}$ is
negative.

When the latter is true, i.e. when the liquid sodium does not fit into
the numerical node without compressing it, the fission-gas pressure,
which is calculated from Eq. (14.4-188), is compared with the sum of the
saturation pressures:

$$\begin{split} &\text{If }\theta_{\text{vg,un}} < 0 \text{ and } P_{\text{fi}} > P_{\text{Nv}} + P_{\text{fv}}~, \\
 &P_{\text{ch}} = P_{\text{fi}}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-189]

$$\begin{split} &\text{If }\theta_{\text{vg,un}} < 0 \text{ and } P_{\text{fi}} < P_{\text{Nv}} + P_{\text{fv}}~, \\
 &P_{\text{ch}} = P_{\text{fi}} + P_{\text{fv}} + P_{\text{Nv}}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-190]

where $P_{\text{fi}}$ is calculated from Eq. (14.4-188).

In the pure vapor/gas regime in which no liquid sodium is left (i.e.,
sodium quality equals one) the channel is calculated from

$$P_{\text{ch}} = P_{\text{Nv}} \left( T_{\text{Na}}, \rho_{\text{Nv}} \right) + P_{\text{fi}} \left( T_{\text{Na}}, \rho_{\text{fi}} \right) + P_{\text{fv}} \left( T_{\text{fu}} \right)$$

where

$$P_{\text{Nv}} = \frac{\text{RGNA} \cdot {\rho'}_{\text{Na}} T_{\text{Na}}}{\theta_{\text{vg,un}}}$$ [eq 14.4-191]

The “gas constant” RGNA is not really a constant but is based on an
interpolation between a special “gas constant”, which leads to the
sodium saturation pressure when inserted into Eq. (14.4-191), and the
actual general gas constant divided by the molecular weight of sodium
vapor. This is described in more detail in Section 16.4.3.5 in the
LEVITATE description.

[anchor: momentum-equations-in-the-coolant-channel]

## 14.4.6. Momentum Equations in the Coolant Channel

[anchor: differential-equations-for-the-sodium-vapor-gas-mixture-and-for-the-moving-solid-or-liquid-fuel]

### 14.4.6.1. Differential Equations for the Sodium/Vapor/Gas/Mixture and for the Moving Solid or Liquid Fuel

[anchor: momentum-equation-for-the-sodium-vapor-gas-mixture]

#### 14.4.6.1.1. Momentum Equation for the Sodium/Vapor/Gas Mixture

The momentum equation for the mixture of liquid sodium, sodium vapor,
fission gas, and fuel vapor is presented in terms of the generalized
smear densities, volume fractions and sources and sinks. The step from
the more basic equation, which includes the cross sectional areas of
each component, to Eq. (14.4-201) below has been omitted because a similar
step has been explained earlier for the mass and energy equations; see
Eq. (14.4-15) or Eq. (14.4-161). However, it should be remembered that the
following equation is written for variable cross section flow. The
variable cross section is included in the generalized smear densities
and volume fractions.

$$\begin{split} \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} u_{\text{Mi}} \right) + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} u_{\text{Mi}}^{2} \right) \\
 = - \theta_{\text{Mi}} \frac{\partial \text{P}_{\text{ch}}}{\partial \text{z}} - {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} g \\
 - \frac{F_{\text{Mi}} {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{2D_{\text{Mi}}} \cdot u_{\text{Mi}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} \right| - f_{\text{drag}} \cdot \left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right) \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right| \\
 - f_{\text{bb}} \rho_{\text{fu,liq}} \frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}}{2} \cdot \left\lbrack \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}\left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right) + u_{\text{Mi}} \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right) \right\rbrack \\
 - {S'}_{\text{Na,deet}} u_{\text{Mi}} - {S'}_{\text{Na,co}} u_{\text{Mi}} - {S'}_{\text{fv,co}} u_{\text{Mi}} \\\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-192]

where the last three terms are sink terms due to sodium droplet
de-entertainment onto the liquid sodium film, and sodium vapor and fuel
vapor condensation on clad and structure. Source terms due to fuel
evaporation and dissolved fission gas release are disregarded. All other
terms will be explained only after the above equation has been modified
by inserting the following mass conservation for the moving
sodium/vapor/gas mixture:

$$\frac{\partial {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{\partial \text{t}} + \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}}\left( {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} u_{\text{Mi}} \right)
 = {S'}_{\text{fi,ej}} + {S'}_{\text{Na,et}} - {S'}_{\text{Na,deet}} - {S'}_{\text{Na,co}} - {S'}_{\text{fv,co}}$$ [eq 14.4-193]

where the source and sink terms on the right-hand side are due to free
fission-gas equation, sodium film entrainment, sodium droplet
de-entrainment onto the liquid film and sodium vapor condensation on
cladding and structure. Source terms due to sodium evaporation, fuel
evaporation and dissolved fission-gas release are not considered.

Eq. (14.4-193) can be inserted into Eq. (14.4-192) if the first term in
Eq. (14.4-192) is split. Splitting this term and inserting the mixture
mass conservation equation leads to a momentum equation in which the
velocity is the dependent variable and not the mass flux. It can be seen
later that this is of key importance for the simultaneous solution of
the two momentum equations considered. (If mass and momentum equations
for both fluids are solved simultaneously as in SIMMER-II [14-19], this
splitting of the mass flux will not be necessary).

Splitting the first term in Eq. (14.4-192) and inserting Eq. (14.4-193)
leads to

$$\begin{split}{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}\frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}} u_{\text{Mi}} = - \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} u_{\text{Mi}}^{2} \right) + u_{\text{Mi}} \cdot \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} u_{\text{Mi}} \right) \\
 - \theta_{\text{Mi}} \frac{\partial \text{P}_{\text{ch}}}{\partial \text{z}} - {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} g - \frac{F_{\text{Mi}} {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{2D_{\text{Mi}}} \cdot u_{\text{Mi}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} \right| \\
 - f_{\text{drag}} \cdot \left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right) \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right| \\
 - f_{\text{bb}} \rho_{\text{fu,liq}} \cdot \frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}}{2} \cdot \left\lbrack \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}\left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right) + u_{\text{Mi}} \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right) \right\rbrack \\
 - {S'}_{\text{Na,et}} u_{\text{Mi}} - {S'}_{\text{fi,ej}} \cdot u_{\text{Mi}} \\\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-194]

where

 $f_{\text{bb}}$ = is a factor which is zero of the particulate and
annular flow regime and has a value of one for the bubbly flow regime.
This means that the apparent mass effect is considered only for the
bubbly flow regime. This was done because in this latter flow regime
accelerating or decelerating low-density bubbles also have to accelerate
or decelerate high-density fuel of half the bubble volume (apparent mass
effect). This has a significant effect on the slip between the bubbles
and the continuous fuel [14-49].

 ${S'}_{\text{Na,et}}$ = the mass of sodium entrained per unit time and
per unit of smear volume

 ${S'}_{\text{fi,ej}}$ = the mass of free fission gas being ejected into
the channel per unit of time and unit of smear volume

 $F_{\text{Mi}}$ = the modified friction coefficient which is different
for each flow regime:

$$\begin{split}F_{\text{Mi,FR1}} \text{ is calculated in } \begin{cases}
\text{Eq. 14.4-82 if } \alpha_{\text{Na}} < \text{CIVOID} \\
\text{Eq. 14.4-86a if liquid sodium films present} \\
\text{Eq. 14.4-91 if no liquid sodium films present}
\end{cases}\end{split}$$

 $F_{\text{Mi,FR3}}$ = see Eq. (14.4-110)

 $F_{\text{Mi,FR4}} = 0$ because there is no contact between
the sodium/gas mixture and the clad or structure in the bubbly flow
regime.

 $F_{\text{drag}}$ = a part of the drag force which is strongly dependent
on the flow regime. For the particulate flow regime this factor is [14-49, 14-63]:

$$f_{\text{drag,FR1}} = \rho_{\text{Mi}} \theta_{\text{fu}} \frac{3}{8f_{\text{Pa}}}
 \left( \frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}}{\theta_{\text{ch,op}}} \right)^{\text{CIA5}} \cdot C_{\text{drag}}$$ [eq 14.4-195]

where

$$\frac{\theta_{\text{fu}}3}{\left( 8r_{\text{Pa}} \right)} = \frac{1}{2} \cdot \pi r_{\text{Pa}}^{2} \cdot {N'}_{\text{Pa}}$$

 ${N'}_{\text{Pa}} = \frac{\theta_{\text{fu}}}{\frac{4}{3} \pi r_{\text{Pa}}^{3}}$ ,
which is the number of fuel particles in a unit of generalized smear
volume

CIA5 is an input controlling the drag dependence on the void fraction. A
value of $-1.7$ is recommended based on references [14-49] and [14-63].

$$\begin{split} C_{\text{drag}} = \begin{cases}
 0.44 & \text{for } \left( \text{Re} \right)_{\text{Pa}} > 500 \\
 18.5 \cdot \left( \text{Re}_{\text{pa}} \right)^{-0.6} & \text{for } \left( \text{Re} \right)_{\text{Pa}} < 500
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-196]

where

$$\begin{split} C_{\text{drag}} = \begin{cases}
 0.44 & \text{for } \left( \text{Re} \right)_{\text{Pa}} > 500 \\
 18.5 \cdot \left( \text{Re}_{\text{pa}} \right)^{-0.6} & \text{for } \left( \text{Re} \right)_{\text{Pa}} < 500
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-197]

 $\mu_{\text{Mi}}$ = viscosity of the sodium/gas mixture (see Eq. (14.4-95))

The partial drag term for the annular fuel flow regime is:

$$f_{\text{drag,FR3}} = \frac{\text{CFFRMF} \cdot {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{\left( 2 D_{\text{Mi}} \right)}$$ [eq 14.4-198]

where

CFFRMF includes the Reynolds number dependency of the drag and the
fraction of the perimeter covered by moving fuel (see Eq. (14.4-157))

 $D_{\text{Mi}} = D_{\text{ch}} \cdot \frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}}{\theta_{\text{ch,op}}}$ ,
where the $D_{\text{ch}}$ accounts for
the frozen crust. The multiplication with the ratio of volume fractions
accounts for the flow cross section reduction of the mixture due to
moving fuel and sodium films. The wetted perimeter is assumed to stay
unchanged. This is a reasonable assumption for a true subchannel
geometry.

The partial drag term for the bubbly flow is similar to that for the
particulate flow (see Eq. (14.4-195)) because non-deformable bubbles are
assumed in PLUTO2.

$$f_{\text{drag,FR4}} = \theta_{\text{Mi}} \rho_{\text{fu,liq}} \frac{3}{8r_{\text{bb}}}
 C_{\text{drag}} \left( \frac{\theta_{\text{fu}}}{\theta_{\text{ch,op}}} \right)^{\text{CIA5}}$$ [eq 14.4-199]

where

 $r_{\text{bb}}$ = bubble radius which cancels out when the drag
coefficient (see Eq. (14.4-202)) is later inserted.

 $C_{\text{drag}}$ = see discussion below and Eq. (14.4-202)

Transient drag coefficients for bubbly flow are not available. Therefore
a drag coefficient is used which is based on steady-state experiments.
The calculation of a terminal (for steady-state) velocity can be
determined by balancing the gravitational and drag forces.

$$\frac{1}{2} C_{\text{drag}} \rho_{\text{fu}} u_{\text{bb},\infty}^{2} \cdot \left( \pi r_{\text{bb}}^{2} \right)
 = \left( \rho_{\text{fu}} - \rho_{\text{Mi}} \right) \cdot g \cdot \left( \frac{4}{3} \pi r_{\text{bb}}^{3} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-200]

A terminal rise velocity obtained from the drift velocity of the bubbles
for the churn turbulent regime similar to that suggested by Zuber
[14-19] is used:

$$u_{\text{bb},\infty} = 1.53 \frac{\theta_{\text{ch,op}}}{\theta_{\text{fu}}} \left\lbrack \frac{\sigma_{\text{fu}}
 g \left( \rho_{\text{fu}} - \rho_{\text{Mi}} \right)}{\rho_{\text{fu}}^{2}} \right\rbrack^{1/4}$$ [eq 14.4-201]

In the formulation of Zuber, this is a drift velocity. For the
relatively high fuel fraction assumed in the bubbly fuel flow regime in
PLUTO2, the actual bubble velocity and drift velocity are not very
different.

After introducing Eq. (14.4-201) into Eq. (14.4-200) one obtains:

$$C_{\text{drag}} = \frac{\sqrt{\left( \rho_{\text{fu}} - \rho_{\text{Mi}} \right) g}}{\sqrt{\sigma_{\text{fu}}}}
 \cdot C_{\text{x}} \cdot r_{\text{bb}} \left( \frac{\theta_{\text{fu}}}{\theta_{\text{ch,op}}} \right)^{2}$$ [eq 14.4-202]

where

 $C_{\text{x}}$ = 1.1392 based on the above Eq. (14.4-200) and Eq. (14.4-201).
The input value of CIA6 is $C_{\text{x}} \cdot 3/8$ which equals 0.4272.

The great advantage of Eq. (14.4-202) is that the bubble radius, which is
difficult to evaluate, appears in the numerator and therefore cancels in
the drag term described in Eq. (14.4-199). However, it is somewhat
questionable whether the bubbly flow in PLUTO2 is really in a churn
turbulent regime. At any rate, the above formulation gives a rather high
draft force, which is appropriate for a bubbly flow regime.

[anchor: momentum-equation-for-the-moving-liquid-or-solid-fuel]

#### 14.4.6.1.2. Momentum Equation for the Moving Liquid or Solid Fuel

The differential equation for the fuel momentum conservation is
presented in a modified form in which the fuel mass conservation is
already included. The latter applies only to the liquid or solid fuel
(compare with Eq. (14.4-16))

$$\frac{\partial{\rho'}_{\text{fu}}}{\partial \text{t}} = - \frac{\partial{\rho'}_{\text{fu}} u_{\text{fu}}}{\partial z} + {S'}_{\text{fu,ej}}$$ [eq 14.4-203]

A sink term due to fuel freezing and a source term due to frozen fuel
crust release or remelting are not included in this mass conservation
and in the momentum conservation because they are calculated separately
in the subroutine treating the fuel plateout and crust release (PLFREZ).

By splitting the momentum storage term and by including Eq. (14.4-203)
(this is similar to the derivation of Eq. (14.4-194)), one arrives at:

$$\begin{split} {\rho'}_{\text{fu}}\frac{\partial \text{u}_{\text{fu}}}{\partial \text{t}} = - \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fu}} u_{\text{fu}}^{2} \right) + u_{\text{fu}} \cdot \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{fu}} u_{\text{fu}} \right) \\
 - \theta_{\text{fu}} \frac{\partial \text{P}_{\text{ch}}}{\partial \text{z}} - {\rho'}_{\text{fu}} g - \frac{F_{\text{fu}} {\rho'}_{\text{fu}}}{2D_{\text{fu}}} u_{\text{fu}} \left| u_{\text{fu}} \right| \\
 + f_{\text{drag}} \cdot \left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right) \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right| \\
 + f_{\text{bb}} \rho_{\text{fu,liq}} \cdot \frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}}{2} \left\lbrack \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{t}}\left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right) + u_{\text{Mi}} \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right) \right\rbrack \\
 + {S'}_{\text{fu,ej}} \cdot \left( u_{\text{fuca}} \cdot \text{CIFUMO} - u_{\text{fu}} \right) \\\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-204]

where

drag and apparent mass forces are the same as in the mixture momentum
Eq. (14.4-194) except that they act in the opposite direction,

 ${S'}_{\text{fu,ej}}$ is the mass of fuel ejected from the failed pins per
unit time per unit of generalized smear volume,

and

CIFUMO is an input value between 0 and 1. It determines how much of
the axial momentum of the fuel just behind the cladding rupture is
retained when the fuel is ejected into the channel. In the L8 analysis
[14-15, 14-12] a value of 1 was used. But it appears that for midplane
failures, which are not rapidly expanding axially, a lower value may be
more appropriate,

 $F_{\text{fu}}$ is a part of the fuel friction force between moving fuel
and cladding, structure, and frozen fuel and is dependent on the fuel
flow regime,

 $F_{\text{fu,FR1}} = 0$ because no friction loss between
fuel particles or droplets and the walls is assumed. This is based on
observations form TREAT and CAMEL out-of-pile experiments in which the
particulate fuel easily travels long distances.

$$\begin{split} F_{\text{fu,FR3}} = \begin{cases}
 \text{CIFRFU} \cdot \text{CTFRFU} & \text{for } \text{Re}_{\text{fu}} > \text{CIREFU} \\
 \frac{64}{\text{Re}_{\text{fu}}} \cdot \text{CTFRFU} & \text{for } \text{Re}_{\text{fu}} < \text{CIREFU}
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-205]

 $\text{Re}_{\text{fu}} = \frac{\rho_{\text{fu}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{fu}} \right| \cdot D_{\text{fu}}}{\mu_{\text{fu}}}$ 

 $\mu_{\text{fu}} = \text{VIFULQ}$ is input viscosity of liquid fuel

 $D_{\text{fu}} = \frac{\theta_{\text{fu}} \cdot D_{\text{ch}}}{\theta_{\text{ch,op}} \cdot \text{CTFRFU}}$ 

CTFRFU is the fraction of open channel perimeter covered by moving fuel
(this includes fuel moving over crusts; see Section 14.4.3.5).

CIFRFU and CIREFU are both input parameters which should be set in a
manner such that there is not a sudden jump in the friction force at
 $\text{Re}_{\text{fu}} = \text{CIREFU}$ 

[anchor: finite-difference-equations-simultaneous-solution-approach-and-subroutine-plmoco]

### 14.4.6.2. Finite Difference Equations, Simultaneous Solution Approach, and Subroutine PLMOCO

One of the problems of using a staggered grid is that the solution of
the momentum equation on the cell edges requires many variables that are
defined on the cell centers. In PLUTO2, most of the needed quantities
are obtained by using half the sum of the upstream and downstream
quantities. Therefore, neighboring cells should have a similar length in
PLUTO2, although a length ratio of less than 2 to 1 for neighboring
cells is not considered to cause significant inaccuracies. In the code,
all variables that are obtained by halving the sum of the upstream and
downstream values contain the two-letter sequence BD (for boundary) at
the end of the variable name. In the finite difference equations, no
special labeling of these variables will be made.

The finite difference forms of the momentum equations are not in
conservative form, although both the mass and energy equations are in
conservative form. This was prompted by the experience that the
calculations were not always stable (in particular for stagnation cells)
when using conservative momentum equations. The latter can be easily
obtained by not combining the first two terms on the right-hand side of
Eq. (14.4-194) and by integrating the equation from the cell midpoint
below a cell boundary to the cell midpoint above it (i.e., over a
“momentum cell”).

In the approach in PLUTO2, the first two terms on the right-hand side of
Eq. (14.4-194) are combined:

$$- \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} u_{\text{Mu}}^{2} \right)
 + u_{\text{Mi}} \cdot \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} u_{\text{Mi}} \right)
 = - {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} u_{\text{Mi}} \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} u_{\text{Mi}}$$ [eq 14.4-206]

All terms in Eq. (14.4-194) that include a product of velocities are
finite differences in the following manner:

$$\frac{F_{\text{Mi}} {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{2D_{\text{Mi}}} \cdot u_{\text{Mi}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} \right|
 = \frac{F_{\text{Mi}} {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{2D_{\text{Mi}}} \cdot \left( u_{\text{Mi}}^{n}
 + \Delta u_{\text{Mi}} \right) \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}}^{n} \right|$$ [eq 14.4-207]

$$f_{\text{drag}} \cdot \left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right) \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}}
 - u_{\text{fu}} \right| = f_{\text{drag}} \cdot \left( u_{\text{Mi}}^{n} + \Delta u_{\text{Mi}}
 - u_{\text{fu}}^{n} - \Delta u_{\text{fu}} \right) \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}}^{n} - u_{\text{fu}}^{n} \right|$$ [eq 14.4-208]

$$u_{\text{Mi}} \frac{\partial}{\partial \text{z}} \left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right)
 = \left( u_{\text{Mi}}^{u} - \Delta u_{\text{Mi}} \right) \cdot \frac{1}{\Delta z} \delta \left( u_{\text{Mi}}^{u}
 - \Delta_{\text{fu}}^{n} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-209]

where $\Delta$ implies change over a time step at a given mesh point and $\delta$ 
implies change over a mesh interval at a given time.

By inserting Eq. (14.4-206) through Eq. (14.4-209) into Eq. (14.4-194), by
switching from partial derivatives to $\delta$ ’s and $\Delta$ ’s, and by collecting
all terms which include $\Delta u_{\text{Mi}}$ on the left-hand side yields:

$$\begin{split} \Delta u_{\text{Mi}} \cdot \left\{ \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{\Delta t} + \frac{F_{\text{Mi}}{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{2D_{\text{Mi}}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} \right| + f_{\text{drag}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right| + f_{\text{bb}} \cdot \rho_{\text{fu,liq}} \cdot \frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}}{2} \cdot \right. \\ \left.
 \left( \frac{1}{\Delta t} + \frac{ \delta \left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\Delta z} \right) \right\} = - {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} u_{\text{Mi}} \frac{ \delta u_{\text{Mi}}}{\Delta z} \\
 - \theta_{\text{Mi}} \frac{\Delta P_{\text{ch}}}{\Delta z} - {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} g - \frac{F_{\text{Mi}}{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{2D_{\text{Mi}}} \cdot u_{\text{Mi}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} \right| \\
 - f_{\text{drag}} \cdot \left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right) \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right| + f_{\text{drag}} \cdot \Delta u_{\text{fu}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right| \\
 + f_{\text{bb}} \rho_{\text{fu,liq}} \frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}}{2} \cdot \left\lbrack \frac{\Delta u_{\text{fu}}}{\Delta t} - u_{\text{Mi}} \frac{\delta \left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\Delta z} \right\rbrack \\
 - {S'}_{\text{Na,et}} u_{\text{Mi}} - {S'}_{\text{fi,ej}} u_{\text{Mi}}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-210]

The superscripts $n$ , that denote the beginning of the time step, have
been dropped in this equation. Before elaborating on the spatial
differencing, the elimination of the $\Delta u_{\text{fu}}$ ’s on the
right-hand side of this equation will be described. This is achieved by
inserting the finite difference form of the fuel momentum equation into
the above equation. The finite difference form of the fuel momentum
equation can be obtained by performing the same manipulations which were
done to arrive at Eq. (14.4-210). The fuel momentum Eq. (14.4-204) reads in
finite difference form:

$$\begin{split} \Delta u_{\text{fu}} = \frac{\text{AHELP}}{\text{BHELP}} + \Delta u_{\text{Mi}} \cdot \left\{ \frac{f_{\text{drag}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right|}{\text{BHELP}} \right. \\ \left.
 + f_{\text{bb}} \rho_{\text{fu,liq}} \frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}}{2} \cdot \left( \frac{1}{\Delta t} + \frac{\delta\left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\Delta z} \right) \cdot \frac{1}{\text{BHELP}} \right\}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-211]

where the second term in the bracket is solely due to the apparent mass
(or inertial) force and

$$\begin{split} \text{AHELP} = - {\rho'}_{\text{fu}}u_{\text{fu}} \frac{\delta u_{\text{fu}}}{\Delta z} - \theta_{\text{fu}} \frac{\Delta P_{\text{ch}}}{\Delta z} - {\rho'}_{\text{fu}} g \\
 - \frac{F_{\text{fu}} {\rho'}_{\text{fu}}}{2 D_{\text{vu}}} u_{\text{fu}} \left| u_{\text{fu}} \right| + f_{\text{drag}} \cdot \left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right) \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right| \\
 + f_{\text{bb}} \rho_{\text{fu,liq}} \frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}}{2} \cdot \frac{\delta\left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\Delta z} \cdot u_{\text{Mi}} \\
 + {S'}_{\text{fu,ej}} \cdot \left( u_{\text{fuca}} \cdot \text{CIFUMO} - u_{\text{fu}} \right)\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-212]

$$\begin{split} \text{BHELP} = \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{fu}}}{\Delta t} + \frac{F_{\text{fu}} {\rho'}_{\text{fu}}}{2 D_{\text{vu}}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{fu}} \right| + f_{\text{bb}} \rho_{\text{fu,liq}}\frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}}{2} \cdot \frac{1}{\Delta t} \\
 + f_{\text{drag}} \left| u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right|\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-213]

Eq. (14.4-211) can now be inserted into Eq. (14.4-210) in order to
eliminate the $\Delta u_{\text{fu}}$ ’s from Eq. (14.4-210). This is necessary
to order to perform the simultaneous solution of the mixture and fuel
momentum equations. Without this simultaneous solution of the momentum
equations, the solution of this two-fluid problem is not stable. The
main reason is that the drag terms in the two momentum equations, which
act in opposite directions and can be quite large, would not always have
the same absolute value, if not solved simultaneously. These
discrepancies between the absolute values of the drag would cause
serious instabilities.

By inserting Eq. (14.4-211) into Eq. (14.4-210) and collecting all the terms
with $\Delta u_{\text{Mi}}$ on the left-hand side, one obtains:

$$\begin{split} \Delta u_{\text{Mi}} \cdot \left\{ \frac{{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{\Delta t} + \frac{F_{\text{Mi}}{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{2D_{\text{Mi}}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} \right| + f_{\text{drag}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right| \right. \\ \left.
 - f_{\text{drag}}^{2} \frac{\left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right)^{2}}{\text{BHELP}} + \text{BMIIN} \right\} \\
 = - {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} u_{\text{Mi}} \frac{ \delta u_{\text{Mi}}}{\Delta z} - \theta_{\text{Mi}} \frac{\Delta P_{\text{ch}}}{\Delta z} - {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} g - \frac{F_{\text{Mi}}{\rho'}_{\text{Mi}}}{2D_{\text{Mi}}} \cdot u_{\text{Mi}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} \right| \\
 - \ f_{\text{drag}} \cdot \left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right) \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right| + f_{\text{drag}} \cdot \frac{\text{AHELP}}{\text{BHELP}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right| \\
 + \text{AMIIN} - {S'}_{\text{Na,et}} u_{\text{Mi}} - {S'}_{\text{fi,ej}} u_{\text{Mi}}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-214]

where

$$\begin{split} \text{AMIIN} = - f_{\text{bb}} \rho_{\text{fu,liq}} \frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}}{2} u_{\text{Mi}} \cdot \frac{\delta\left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\Delta z} \\
 + f_{\text{bb}} \rho_{\text{fu,liq}} \frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}}{2} \cdot \frac{\text{AHELP}}{\left( \text{BHELP} \cdot \Delta t \right)}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-215]

$$\begin{split} \text{BMIIN} = - f_{\text{bb}} \rho_{\text{fu,liq}} \frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}}{2} \cdot \left( \frac{1}{\Delta t} + \frac{\delta\left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\Delta z} \right) \\
 - f_{\text{bb}} \rho_{\text{fu,liq}} \frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}}{2} f_{\text{drag}} \cdot \left| u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right| \cdot \left( \frac{2}{\Delta t} + \frac{\delta\left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\Delta t} \right) \big/ \text{BHELP} \\
 - f_{\text{bb}}^{2} \rho_{\text{fu,liq}}^{2} \cdot \frac{\theta_{\text{Mi}}^{2}}{4} \cdot \frac{1}{\Delta t} \cdot \left( \frac{1}{\Delta t} + \frac{\delta\left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\Delta z} \right) \big/ \text{BHELP} \\\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-216]

AMIIN and BMIIN includes most of the terms related to the apparent mass
force (the others are included in AHELP and BHELP).

Eq. (14.4-214) can be solved for $\Delta u_{\text{Mi}}$ . This
 $\Delta u_{\text{Mi}}$ is then used in the fuel momentum Eq. (14.4-211) to
solve for the fuel velocity increment $\Delta u_{\text{fu}}$ . As discussed
earlier, this simultaneous solution of the two momentum equations is of
key importance for achieving a stable solution of the two-fluid problem.

An item not yet discussed is the finite differencing of the spatial
derivatives. As mentioned earlier, an important feature in PLUTO2 is
that the convective momentum and mass fluxes are combined (see Eq. (14.4-206))
which makes the momentum equations nonconservative but leads
to stable solutions. The spatial differencing of the convective term is
demonstrated for the mixture momentum flux term

$$\begin{split} {\rho'}_{\text{Mi}} u_{\text{Mi}} \frac{\Delta u_{\text{Mi}}}{\Delta z} = \begin{cases}
 \frac{u_{\text{Mi,i}} {\rho'}_{\text{Mi,i-1}} \left( u_{\text{Mi,i}} - u_{\text{Mi,i-1}} \right)}{\Delta z_{\text{i-1}}} & \text{for } u_{\text{Mi,i}} > 0 \\
 \frac{u_{\text{Mi,i}} {\rho'}_{\text{Mi,i}} \left( u_{\text{Mi,i+1}} - u_{\text{Mi,i}} \right)}{\Delta z_{\text{i}}} & \text{for } u_{\text{Mi,i}} < 0
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-217]

The finite differencing of the fuel momentum flux term is done
similarly.

The mixture momentum fluxes for the lowermost and for the uppermost
cells use the velocities of the sodium slug interfaces if upstream or
downstream velocities are needed in the above convective flux
calculation. For these nodes, the $\Delta z_{\text{i}}$ ’s are the distances
between the slug interfaces and the lowermost or uppermost cell
boundaries at which the mixture momentum equation is solved.

The fuel velocities at the extremes of the fuel region are needed for
the calculation of the convective fuel momentum fluxes at the lowermost
and uppermost cell boundaries and also for the calculation of the
interface locations of the fuel domain which is done in subroutine PLIF.
If the fuel in the uppermost or lowermost fuel node is in a continuous
fuel flow regime, the velocity of the upper or lower fuel interface will
be set to the velocity of the nearest cell boundary for which the fuel
velocity has been calculated by the fuel momentum equations. If the
uppermost or lowermost fuel node is in a particulate flow regime, a
Lagrangian momentum equation will be solved for a fuel particle at the
upper or lower end of the fuel region. The force terms in this momentum
equation are equivalent to those in the regular Eulerian momentum
equation (see Eq. (14.4-204)), but there is, of course, no convective flux
terms in this Lagrangian momentum equation.

Also needed is a spatial differencing of the gradients of the relative
velocities between mixture and fuel which appear in Eq. (14.4-215) and
14.4-184. The following upwind differencing which is keyed on the much
more sensitive mixture velocity is done in the following way:

$$\begin{split} \frac{\Delta\left( u_{\text{Mi}} - u_{\text{fu}} \right)}{\Delta z} = \begin{cases}
 \frac{\left( u_{\text{Mi,i}} - u_{\text{Mi,i-1}} - u_{\text{fu,i}} + u_{\text{fu,i-1}} \right)}{\Delta z_{\text{i-1}}} & \text{for } u_{\text{Mi,i}} > 0 \\
 \frac{\left( u_{\text{Mi,i+1}} - u_{\text{Mi,i}} - u_{\text{fu,i+1}} + u_{\text{fu,i}} \right)}{\Delta z_{\text{i}}} & \text{for } u_{\text{Mi,i}} < 0
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-218]

Subroutine PLMOCO (PLUTO2 MOMENTUM CONSERVATION) sets up all
of the coefficients needed for the solution of the momentum
conservation. (This is mainly because these coefficients are needed at
the cell edges and have previously been set only at the midpoints.
However, most interfacial drag terms were not set up earlier.)
Subroutine PLMOCO also sets up the convective momentum flux terms and it
performs the simultaneous solution fo the two momentum equations.
Moreover, the calculation of the fuel region interface velocities, which
was described in the previous paragraph, is done. Subroutine PLMOCO also
calculates the velocity changes of the liquid sodium slugs above and
below the interaction region. This is described in the next section.

[anchor: velocity-calculation-for-the-liquid-sodium-slug-interfaces]

### 14.4.6.3. Velocity Calculation for the Liquid Sodium Slug Interfaces

Ideally, the liquid sodium slugs should be modeled with a fully
compressible treatment. Although this was done in the original PLUTO
code [14-3. 14-4], it has not been incorporated in PLUTO2 because it is
not considered important for whole-core calculations and because a fully
compressible calculation in the liquid slugs requires the use of very
small time steps. In an earlier stand-alone version of PLUTO2, an
optional compressible treatment, which allows a separate time step in
the liquid slugs and in the interaction region, should eventually be
incorporated into SAS4A/PLUTO2 for use in expensive analyses.

In the currently available treatment in SAS4A/PLUTO2, an acoustic
approach is used in the lower and upper slug until the initial pressure
waves reach the subassembly inlet and exit, respectively. From then on,
the liquid sodium slugs are treated with an incompressible approach.

The initial acoustic approach in PLUTO2 is only used until the pressure
wave hits the nearest free surface and not during the round trip time of
the expanding and receding pressure wave. The latter is commonly used
for the acoustic approximation, but was not used in PLUTO2 because
comparisons with the fully compressible PLUTO cod [14.3, 14-4] showed
better agreement when only the time for reaching the nearest free
surface was used. This time is evaluated in PLUTO2 based on the velocity
of sound. The velocity of sound in the lower slug for
temperature-independent density and compressibility is:

$$u_{\text{sonic,N1,ls}} = \sqrt{\frac{1}{\left( \rho_{\text{N1,ls}} \cdot K_{\text{N1}} \right)}}$$ [eq 14.4-219]

where

 $\rho_{\text{N1,ls}}$ is the average density of the lower
sodium slug at the time of PLUTO2 initialization

 $K_{\text{N1}}$ is the liquid sodium compressibility which is an
input constant (see CMNL)

The time to reach the free surfaces at the inlet or outlet are
calculated from:

$$\Delta t_{\text{ac,ls}} = \frac{L_{\text{ls}}}{u_{\text{sonic,N1,ls}}}$$ [eq 14.4-220]

$$\Delta t_{\text{ac,us}} = \frac{L_{\text{us}}}{u_{\text{sonic,N1,us}}}$$ [eq 14.4-221]

where

 $L_{\text{ls}}$ and $L_{\text{us}}$ are the lengths of the lower and upper
slug, respectively.

The calculation of the velocities of the interfaces between liquid slugs
and interaction region is based on the basic physics equation stating
that force is equal to the rate of momentum change. This is applied to a
shock front crossing the interface that is driven by a pressure
difference $\Delta P$ :

$$\frac{\Delta\left( M \cdot u_{\text{if}} \right)}{\Delta t} = - \Delta P \cdot A_{\text{ch}}$$ [eq 14.4-222]

where

$$\Delta\left( M \cdot u_{\text{if}} \right) = \rho_{\text{N1}} \cdot A_{\text{ch}} \
 \cdot u_{\text{sonic,N1}} \cdot \Delta t \cdot \left\lbrack u_{\text{if}} \
 - u_{\text{if}} \left( t_{\text{o}} \right) \right\rbrack$$ [eq 14.4-223]

For this equation, the mass accelerated to velocity $u_{\text{if}}$ per
 $\Delta t$ is the mass which was crossed by the shock wave during $\Delta t$ . This
mass is accelerated through a velocity increment of
 $\left\lbrack u_{\text{if}} - u_{\text{if}} \left( t_{\text{o}} \right) \right\rbrack$ 
due to the crossing of the shock. By inserting Eq. (14.4-223) into Eq. (14.4-222), one obtains:

$$u_{\text{if}} = u_{\text{if}}\left( t_{\text{o}} \right) - \frac{\Delta P}{\rho_{\text{N1}} u_{\text{sonic,N1}}}$$ [eq 14.4-224]

For $u_{\text{if}} \left( t_{\text{o}} \right) = 0$ , this would be equal to the first
Rankine-Hugoniot condition for shock waves [14-56] if the actual shock
velocity rather than the sonic limit were used.

The above equation is used for the velocity calculation of the lower
slug interface during the acoustic period (see Eq. (14.4-220)):

$$u_{\text{if,1s}} \left( t \right) = u_{\text{if,ls}} \left( t_{\text{o}} \right)
 + \frac{P_{\text{if,ls}} \left( t \right) - P_{\text{inlet}}}{\sqrt{\rho_{\text{N1,ls}} \big/ K_{\text{N1}}}}$$ [eq 14.4-225]

In this equation, the definition of the velocity of sound Eq. (14.4-219) and
time-dependent interface pressure were introduced. To use a
time-dependent pressure is not in the spirit of Eq. (14.4-224) which
assumes a constant pressure difference. This represents the main
assumption of the acoustic approximation in PLUTO2. Comparison
calculations with the fully compressible PLUTO code [14.3, 14-4] have
shown that it is a reasonable assumption. For the velocity calculation
of the upper slug, the following is used during the acoustic period:

$$u_{\text{if,us}} \left( t \right) = u_{\text{if,us}} \left( t_{\text{o}} \right)
 + \frac{P_{\text{if,us}} \left( t \right) - P_{\text{outlet}}}{\sqrt{\rho_{\text{N1,us}} \big/ K_{\text{N1}}}}$$ [eq 14.4-226]

After the acoustic period for the lower slug is over (see Eq. (14.4-220)),
the incompressible calculation of the lower slug mass flow rate begins.
For the upper slug, this calculation starts after the time calculated by
Eq. (14.4-221) has been exceeded.

A separate incompressible slug calculation is done for the lower sodium
slug (below the interaction region) and for the upper slug (above the
interaction region). These slugs can occupy several axial channel zones.
Each channel zone is characterized by its input flow cross section,
hydraulic diameter and axial length. The sodium slugs can fully extend
over several channel zones, but the uppermost segment of the lower slug
and the lowermost segment of the upper slug do not fully cover a channel
zone because of the presence of the interaction region. The length of
the uppermost segment of the lower slug and the lowermost segment of the
upper slug can vary because they have moving boundaries. A control
volume approach for the momentum balance of one slug segment yields
(after taking into account the assumption of a constant density in the
entire lower or upper slug):

$$\begin{split} \rho_{\text{N1,i}} A_{\text{ch,i}} \frac{\Delta\left( u_{\text{N1,i}} L_{\text{i}} \right)}{\Delta t} = - \rho_{\text{N1}} u_{\text{N1,i+1}}^{2} A_{\text{ch,i}} F_{\text{i+1}} + \rho_{\text{N1}} u_{\text{N1,i}}^{2}, A_{\text{ch,i}} F_{\text{i}} \\
 - A_{\text{ch,i}} P_{\text{ch,i+1}} + A_{\text{ch,i}} P_{\text{ch,i}} - f_{\text{fr,i}} \cdot L_{\text{i}} \cdot \frac{\left( u_{\text{N1}} \left| u_{\text{N1}} \right|\rho_{\text{N1}} A_{\text{ch}} \right)_{\text{i}}}{2 D_{\text{ch,i}}} - g L_{\text{i}} \rho_{\text{N1,i}} A_{\text{ch,i}} \\
 - 0.5 A_{\text{ch,i}} \Delta P_{\text{z=z}_{\text{i}}} - 0.5 A_{\text{ch,i}} \Delta P_{\text{z=z}_{\text{i+1}}} - A_{\text{ch,i}} \Delta P_{\text{or}} \\\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-227]

where the last three terms describe entrance and exit losses and the
losses due to grid spacers in this slug segment and

 $L_{\text{i}}$ = length of slug segment $i$ 

$$\begin{split}\rho_{\text{N1}} = \begin{cases}
\begin{aligned}
\rho_{\text{N1,ls}} & = & \text{average sodium density for lower slug calculation} \\
&\ & \text{given by the input parameter RHSLBT} \\
\rho_{\text{N1,us}} & = & \text{average sodium density for lower slug calculation} \\
&\ & \text{given by the input parameter RHSLBP}
\end{aligned}
\end{cases}\end{split}$$

 $A_{\text{ch,i}}$ = cross section of slug segment $i$ 

 $F_{\text{i}} = 1$ except $i$ designates the lower (moving) interface of
the upper slug. In this case, $F_{\text{i}} = 0$ .

 $F_{\text{i+1}} = 1$ except when $i+1$ designates the upper
(moving) interface of the lower slug. In this case, $F_{\text{i+1}} = 0$ .

The left-hand side of Eq. (14.4-227) can be rewritten as

$$\rho_{\text{N1}} A_{\text{ch,i}} \cdot \frac{\Delta\left( u_{\text{N1,i}} L_{\text{i}} \right)}{\Delta t}
 = \rho_{\text{N1,i}} A_{\text{ch,i}} \left( L_{\text{i}} \frac{\Delta u_{\text{N1,i}}}{\Delta t}
 + u_{\text{N1,i}} \frac{\Delta L_{\text{i}}}{\Delta t} \right)$$ [eq 14.4-228]

The $\frac{\Delta L_{\text{i}}}{\Delta t}$ is only non-zero for the
uppermost segment of the lower slug and the lowermost segment of the
upper slug. For the case of these two special slug segments:

$$\begin{aligned}
 \frac{\Delta L_{\text{i}}}{\Delta t} = u_{\text{N1,i}}~, && \text{for the uppermost segment of the lower slug}
 \end{aligned}$$ [eq 14.4-229]

$$\begin{aligned}
 \frac{\Delta L_{\text{i}}}{\Delta t} = - u_{\text{N1,i}}~, && \text{for the lowermost segment of the upper slug}
 \end{aligned}$$ [eq 14.4-230]

For slug segments that are neither the uppermost one of the lower slug
nor the lowermost one of the upper slug, the two convective terms in
Eq. (14.4-227) cancel because the velocity is the same everywhere in a slug
segment. For the uppermost segment of the lower slug, only the second
convective term is present in Eq. (14.4-227) and this one cancels with the
last term of the right-hand side of Eq. (14.4-228). For the lowermost
segment of the upper slug, only the first convective term is present in
Eq. (14.4-227). This one cancels also with the last term in Eq. (14.4-228)
because of Eq. (14.4-230), which holds in this case.

After inserting Eq. (14.4-228) into Eq. (14.4-227), cancelling the
convective terms and the terms with $\frac{\Delta L_{\text{i}}}{\Delta t}$ (see above
discussion), and after dividing the new equation with
 $A_{\text{ch,i}}$ , all the segment equations for each of the
two slugs are added up. For the lower slug, this lead to:

$$\begin{split} \frac{\Delta W_{\text{ls}}}{\Delta t} \cdot \sum_{\text{i=1}}^{i = \text{IB}}{\frac{L_{\text{i}}}{A_{\text{ch,i}}} = - P_{\text{ch,IB}} + P_{\text{ch,inlet}}} \\
 - \sum_{\text{i=1}}^{i = \text{IB}}{f_{\text{i}} L_{\text{i}} \rho_{\text{N1,ls}} \frac{u_{\text{i}} \left| u_{\text{i}} \right|}{2 D_{\text{ch,i}}} - \sum_{\text{i=1}}^{i = \text{IB}}{L_{\text{i}} \rho_{\text{N1,ls}} g}} \\
 - \sum_{\text{i=1}}^{i = \text{IB}}{\Delta P_{\text{zi}} + \Delta P_{\text{or,ls}}}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-231]

where

 $W_{\text{ls}} = \rho_{\text{N1,ls}} A_{\text{ch,i}} u_{\text{N1,i}}$ , the mass flow
rate which is the same in all segments of the lower slug because of the
assumed incompressibility

 $\text{IB}$ = index of the uppermost segment of the lower slug

 $P_{\text{ch,IB}}$ = pressure in the first node of the interaction region

 $\Delta P_{\text{zi}}$ = pressure drop due to the area change between segment
 $i-1$ and segment $i$ or due to an orifice at the bottom of segment $i$ .
This pressure drop is evaluated from

$$\Delta P_{\text{zi}} = \text{XKOR} V_{\text{i,m}} u_{\text{N1,i}} \left| u_{\text{N1,i}} \right| \frac{\rho_{\text{N1,ls}}}{2}$$ [eq 14.4-232]

where $\text{XKORV}_{\text{i,m}}$ is the input contraction or expansion
coefficient for upward or downward flow. This can also be an orifice
coefficient for segment $i$ . Coefficients with $m = 1$ are used for
upward flow; coefficients with $m = 2$ for downward flow,
 $\Delta P_{\text{or,ls}}$ is the pressure drop due to grid
spacers in the channel zone KZPIN and is evaluated from the equation

$$\Delta P_{\text{or,ls}} = N_{\text{or}} \cdot \text{XKORGD} \cdot u_{\text{N1,i}} \left| u_{\text{N1,i}} \right| \frac{\rho_{\text{N1,ls}}}{2}$$ [eq 14.4-233]

where

 $\text{KZPIN}$ = the channel zone which contains the pins

 $\text{XKORGD}$ = an input pressure-drop coefficient for a single grid spacer

$$N_{\text{or}} = \frac{\text{NGRDSP} \cdot \left( z_{\text{ls,if}} - z_{\text{i=KZPIN}} \right)}{L_{\text{i=KZPIN}}}$$ [eq 14.4-234]

where

NGRDSP = the number of uniformly distributed grid spacers in the channel
zone KZPIN which is input.

 $Z_{\text{ls,if}}$ = axial location of the lower slug interface

 $Z_{\text{i=KZPIN}}$ = location of the lower boundary of channel zone KZPIN

For the upper sodium slug, the incompressible momentum equation is

$$\begin{split} \frac{\Delta W_{\text{us}}}{\Delta t} \cdot \sum_{\text{i=IT}}^{i + \text{IMAX}}{\frac{L_{\text{i}}}{A_{\text{ch,i}}} = P_{\text{ch,IT}} + P_{\text{ch,outlet}}} \\
 - \sum_{\text{i=IT}}^{i = \text{IMAX}}{f_{\text{i}} L_{\text{i}} \rho_{\text{NI,us}} \frac{u_{\text{i}} \left| u_{\text{i}} \right|}{2 D_{\text{ch,i}}}} - \sum_{\text{i+IT}}^{i = \text{MAX}}{L_{\text{i}} \rho_{\text{N1,us}} g} \\
 - \sum_{\text{i=IT}}^{i - \text{IMAX}}{\Delta P_{\text{zi}} + \Delta P_{\text{or,us}}} \\\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-235]

where

 $\text{IT}$ = index of the lowermost segment of the upper slug

 $\text{IMAX}$ = index of the top segment of the upper slug

The reason for performing the slug momentum calculations is to determine
the upper and lower interface velocities of the interaction region:

$$u_{\text{if,ls}}^{n + 1} = u_{\text{if,ls}}^{n} + \Delta W_{\text{ls}} \cdot \frac{1}{\rho_{\text{N1,ls}} A_{\text{IB}}}$$ [eq 14.4-236]

and

$$u_{\text{if,us}}^{n + 1} = u_{\text{if,us}}^{n} + \Delta W_{\text{us}} \cdot \frac{1}{\rho_{\text{N1,us}} A_{\text{IT}}}$$ [eq 14.4-237]

where

 $A_{\text{IB}}$ = the flow area of the uppermost segment of the lower slug

 $A_{\text{IT}}$ = the flow area of the lowermost segment of the upper slug.

[anchor: pluto2-time-step-determination]

### 14.4.6.4. PLUTO2 Time Step Determination

The PLUTO2 time step $\Delta t_{\text{PL}}$ used in the numerical marching of
all the in-pin and channel conservation equations is restricted by the
sonic Courant conditions for both the in-pin and the channel flows. An
upper limit $\Delta t_{\text{PL,pin}}$ of the PLUTO2 time step computed,
based on the sonic Courant condition for the in-pin flow of the fuel and
fission gas two-phase mixture, is given in Section 14.2.8. In the
present section, another upper limit $\Delta t_{\text{PL,ch}}$ of the PLUTO2
time step is computed based on the sonic Courant condition for the
multi-component channel flow, and then the smaller of the two upper
limits gives the PLUTO2 time step $\Delta t_{\text{PL}}$ . The upper limit
 $\Delta t_{\text{PL,ch}}$ is computed to be a fraction, 0.4, (same as that
used in computing $\Delta t_{\text{PL,pin}}$ ) of the minimum time step based
on the sonic Courant condition for the channel flow.

$$\Delta t_{\text{PL,ch}} + 0.4 \cdot \min\left\lbrack \frac{{z}_{1}}{\left( V_{\text{sonic,I}}
 + |u_{\text{MI,I}}| \right)} \right\rbrack_{\text{I=IFMIBT,IFMITP}}$$ [eq 14.4-238]

The minimum in Eq. (14.4-238) is evaluated over all axial cells of the
interaction region. The sonic velocity in the channel is calculated from
an equation [14-28] for an adiabatic homogeneous two-phase mixture of
liquid sodium and fission gas/sodium vapor. The compressibility of
liquid fuel being much smaller than that of liquid sodium, the fuel is
assumed to be incompressible in the calculation of the sonic velocity in
the channel. The effect of fuel vapor is also not included.

$$\begin{split} V_{\text{sonic}}^{2} = \gamma_{\text{vg}}\left( P_{\text{fi}} + P_{\text{Nv}} \right) \big/ \left\{ \alpha_{\text{vg}}^{2} \left( \rho_{\text{fi}} + \rho_{\text{Nv}} \right) + \alpha_{\text{vg}} \left( 1 - \alpha_{\text{vg}} \right)\rho_{\text{N1}} \right. \\ \left.
 + \left\lbrack \alpha_{\text{vg}}\left( 1 - \alpha_{\text{vg}} \right) \left( \rho_{\text{fi}} + \rho_{\text{Nv}} \right) + \left( 1 - \alpha_{\text{vg}} \right)^{2} \rho_{\text{N1}} \right\rbrack \gamma_{\text{vg}} \left( P_{\text{fi}} + P_{\text{NV}} \right) K_{\text{N1}} \right\}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.4-239]

where

 $\alpha_{\text{vg}} = \frac{\theta_{\text{vg}}}{\left( \theta_{\text{ch,op}} - \theta_{\text{fu}} \right)}$ =
void fraction in the two-phase mixture of liquid sodium and fission
gas/sodium vapor.

 $\gamma_{\text{vg}}$ = ratio of specific heat at constant pressure to that at
constant volume of the fission gas/sodium vapor mixture. A value of 1.4
is assumed in the PLUTO2 code.

 $K_{\text{N1}} = \text{MNL}$ = adiabatic compressibility of liquid
sodium.

The fission-gas pressure $P_{\text{fi}}$ and pressure $P_{\text{Nv}}$ due
to sodium vapor are obtained as explained in Section 14.4.5 using the
following equations.

$$P_{\text{fi}} = \frac{R_{\text{fi}} {\rho'}_{\text{fi}} T_{\text{Na}}}{\theta_{\text{vg}}}$$ [eq 14.4-240]

$$P_{\text{Nv}} = \frac{\text{RGNA} \cdot {\rho'}_{\text{Nv}} T_{\text{Na}}}{\theta_{\text{vg}}}$$ [eq 14.4-241]

After evaluating the two upper limits $\Delta t_{\text{PL,pin}}$ and
 $\Delta t_{\text{PL,ch}}$ using Eq. (14.2-69) and Eq. (14.4-238), the PLUTO2 time
step $\Delta t_{\text{PL}}$ is taken to be the smaller of the two.

$$\Delta t_{\text{PL}} = \min\left\lbrack {t}_{\text{PL,pin}}, {t}_{\text{PL,ch}} \right\rbrack$$ [eq 14.4-242]

If the value of $\Delta t_{\text{PL}}$ obtained from Eq. (14.4-242) is less
than the minimum time step given by the input parameter DTPLIN
(suggested value $2.5 \times 10^{-5}$ s), then $\Delta t_{\text{PL}}$ is set
equal to DIPLIN. Also, the PLUTO2 time step $\Delta t_{\text{PL}}$ is not
allowed to exceed a maximum value of $2 \times 10^{-4}$ s (a number built
in the code). The value of $\Delta t_{\text{PL}}$ obtained in this way is
rounded to an integral multiple of $1.0 \times 10^{-5}$ s. The PLUTO2 time
steps are not allowed to span the coolant dynamics time-step boundaries,
or the heat-transfer time-step boundaries, or the primary loop time-step
boundaries.

Footnotes

[3]

*Fuel vapor is not yet operational.

[4]

**Fuel vapor is not yet operational.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[page: Part04/Ch14/temperatures.html]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[anchor: temperature-calculation-of-cladding-structure-reflector-and-liquid-sodium]

# 14.5. Temperature Calculation of Cladding, Structure, Reflector, and Liquid Sodium

[anchor: liquid-sodium-cladding-structure-and-reflector-temperature-calculation-outside-of-the-interaction-region]

## 14.5.1. Liquid Sodium, Cladding, Structure, and Reflector Temperature Calculation Outside of the Interaction Region

The expulsion of coolant from the core after PLUTO2 initiation (due to
fuel-coolant interaction) results in significant preheating of cladding
and other structures prior to the passage of the void interface,
especially for the lower liquid slug, which has a large axial thermal
gradient. Consequently, it is necessary to continue to compute the
temperatures outside of the interaction zone after PLUTO2 initiation in
order to provide accurate updated initial temperatures for cells being
added t the integration zone (i.e., voided region). Core cladding
temperatures outside of the interaction zone are computed in PLHTR,
which is a modified version of the standard SAS [in heat-transfer model
TSHTRV. Special routines were developed to compute the liquid coolant,
structure, plenum cladding, and reflector temperatures outside of the
interaction zone; a description of these subroutines follows.

Coolant temperatures are computed (in subroutine PLCOOL) based on a
heat-transfer time step, as are those of the wetted structure, cladding,
and reflector. The heat-transfer time step may be altered (in PLUDRV) to
satisfy a Courant condition in either slug, based on the instantaneous
sodium velocity.

The PLUTO coolant nodes, unlike those in the SAS boiling model, are
centered in the numerical cell in order to be consistent with the PLUTO
node structure in the interaction zone. The finite-difference equation,
given below, is time explicit and uses donor cell differencing for the
convective term:

$$A_{\text{ch}} \rho_{\text{N1}} C_{\text{p,N1}} L_{\text{i}} \left( T_{\text{N1,i}}^{n + 1} - T_{\text{N1}}^{n} \right) \
 + \Delta M_{\text{N1,i}} C_{\text{p,N1}} \left( T_{\text{N1,i}}^{n} - T_{\text{N1,i-1}}^{n} \right) = H_{\text{i}}^{l} L_{\text{i}} \Delta t_{\text{Ht}}~, \text{ for } W_{\text{N1}} > 0$$ [eq 14.5-1]

where

 $A_{\text{ch,i}}$ = local flow area,

 $L_{\text{i}}$ = wetted length in axial cell $i$ ,

 $T_{\text{N1,i}}^{n}$ ; $T_{\text{N1,i}}^{n + 1}$ = nodal coolant temperatures
at times $t$ and $t + \Delta t$ .

 $\Delta M_{\text{N1,i}}$ = mass transport into axial cell $I$ 
during time interval $\Delta t$ .

 $H_{\text{i}}^{l}$ = heat-transfer rate from cladding and
structure per unit length.

 $\rho_{\text{N1}}$ = coolant density.

 $C_{\text{p,N1}}$ = coolant specific heat.

 $\Delta t_{\text{Ht}}$ = heat-transfer time step.

 $W_{\text{N1}}$ = liquid sodium mass flowrate.

A similar equation is used for the case of downflow.

Normally $L_{\text{i}}$ is set equal to the cell length:

$$L_{\text{i}} = z_{\text{i+1}} - z_{\text{i}}$$ [eq 14.5-2]

where $z_{\text{i}}$ is the elevation of the lower cell boundary. Also,
the mass transport $\Delta M_{\text{i}}$ is usually taken to be the product
of the mean flowrate $W_{\text{N1}}$ , computed from the
interface displacement, times $\Delta t_{\text{Ht}}$ . Exceptions are made for
cells containing the void interfaces.

Consider the mesh cell containing the upper interface of the lower slug.
For this case the wetted length is given by

$$L_{\text{i}} = z_{\text{if}}^{n + 1} - z_{\text{i}}$$ [eq 14.5-3]

where $z_{\text{if}}^{n + 1}$ = interface elevation for the lower
slug at the end of the heat-transfer time step and $z_{\text{i}}$ =
location of the fixed mesh cell boundary below the slug interface. For
the case of expulsion (negative velocity in the lower slug), the inflow
into the end cell is zero unless the interface crossed the upper
boundary:

$$\begin{split} \Delta M_{\text{N1,i}} = \begin{cases}
 0 & \text{for } z_{\text{if}}^{n} < Z_{\text{i+1}} \\
 - A_{\text{ch,i}} \left( 1 - f \right) \rho_{\text{N1,i}} \left( z_{\text{if}}^{n + 1} - z_{\text{i+1}} \right) & \text{for } z_{\text{if}}^{n} \geq z_{\text{i+1}} \\
 \end{cases}\end{split}$$ [eq 14.5-4]

where

 $f$ = input volume fraction CINAFO of liquid film left behind.

 $z_{\text{if}}^{n}$ = interface elevation for lower slug at time
 $t$ .

For the case when the lower slug first reenters a cell, the coolant
temperature for the end cell is set by
 $T_{\text{ch,i}}^{n + 1} = T_{\text{ch,i-1}}^{n + 1}$ . In
subsequent time steps, the end node temperature (for reentry or
 $W_{\text{N1}} > 0$ ) is computed with the reduced wetted length
and with $\Delta M_{\text{i}} = W_{\text{N1}} \Delta t_{\text{Ht}}$ .
Similar reasoning is applied to the treatment of the segment containing
the lower interface of the upper slug.

The reflector, gas plenum cladding, and structure temperatures outside
of the interaction zone are computed in subroutine FLSTR using
straightforward, explicit-time-differenced equations. Like the coolant
calculation, these temperatures are computed every heat-transfer time
step. The difference equations are based on the same nodal structure as
used in the pre-PLUTO2 SAS4A calculations and used the same FORTRAN
variable names, which eliminates the need to initialize these variables
when PLUTO2 calculations are begun. Reinitialization is required,
however, during coolant reentry.

[anchor: cladding-and-reflector-temperature-calculation-in-the-interaction-region]

## 14.5.2. Cladding and Reflector Temperature Calculation in the Interaction Region

The transient cladding, reflector, and structure temperatures within the
interaction region are computed in subroutine PLTECS, which is called
form subroutine PLUDRV every PLUTO time step (see Figure 14.5.1). In the
interaction region, both the cladding and reflector have three radial
nodes (per axial segment), each of which has a different FORTRAN name.
However, a temporary radial temperature array is defined with the
numbering scheme shown in Figure 14.5.1 for the purpose of facilitating
the solution of the radial heat conduction problem.

To evaluate cladding temperatures more accurately, one desires a
constantly updated fuel surface temperature (every PLUTO2 time step)
rather than the one computed from PLHTR every heat-transfer time step.
This updated fuel surface temperature is obtained by extending the nodal
structure to overlap that of the fuel model as shown in Figure 14.5.1. By
overlapping, the fuel surface temperature is computed along with the
cladding temperatures every PLUTO2 time step. To insure consistency with
the fuel model, the temperature of node 2 (fuel surface) is reset along
with that of node 1 every heat-transfer time step. The fuel temperature
calculation in PLHTR, in turn, uses an integrated fuel-heat-loss
boundary condition obtained from the cladding model.

The transient heat-transfer equation for each node is expressed in the
following standard form:

$$\left( \text{MC}_{\text{p}} \right)_{\text{i}} \frac{\text{dT}_{\text{i}}}{\text{dt}} \
 = \left( ha \right)_{\text{i-1}} \left( T_{\text{i-1}} - T_{\text{i}} \right) \
 + \left( ha \right)_{\text{i}} \left( T_{\text{i+1}} - T_{\text{i}} \right) + Q_{\text{i}}^{l}$$ [eq 14.5-5]

where

 $T_{\text{i}}$ is the nodal temperature.

 $\left( \text{MC}_{\text{p}} \right)_{\text{i}}$ is the heat capacity of the control volume
per unit length.

 $\left( ha \right)_{\text{i}}$ is the coefficient of heat transfer from node $I$ 
to $I + 1$ per unit length,

 $Q_{\text{i}}^{l}$ is the control volume heat-generation rate
per unit length.

The coefficients $\left(\text{MC}_{\text{p}} \right)_{\text{i}}$ and $\left( ha \right)_{\text{i}}$ are
evaluated by the following relations:

$$\left( \text{MC}_{\text{p}} \right)_{\text{i}} = \pi \left( r_{\text{i}}^{2} \
 - {\hat{r}}_{\text{i-1}}^{2} \right) \rho_{\text{i+1}} C_{\text{p,i-1}} \
 + \pi \left( {\hat{r}}_{\text{i}}^{2} - r_{\text{i}}^{2} \right) \rho_{\text{i}} C_{\text{p,i}}$$ [eq 14.5-6]

$$\left( ha \right)_{\text{i}} = \frac{2\pi r_{\text{i}} {\hat{k}}_{\text{i}}}{\left( r_{\text{i+1}} \
 - r_{\text{i}} \right)}~, \text{ for } i \neq 2,5$$ [eq 14.5-7]

$$\left( ha \right)_{\text{i}} = 2\pi r_{\text{i}} {\hat{h}}_{\text{i}}~, \text{ for } i = 2,5$$ [eq 14.5-8]

where $\rho_{\text{i}}$ , $C_{\text{p,i}}$ , and $k_{\text{i}}$ are
the density, specific heat, and thermal conductivity of the material
between nodes $i$ and $i+1$ . Based on the numbering scheme shown in
Figure 14.5.1, the quantities $k_{3}$ and $k_{4}$ are set
equal to the input value of the cladding thermal conductivity DCL. The
products $\rho_{3} C_{\text{p,4}}$ and $\rho_{4} C_{\text{p,4}}$ 
are set equal to the input parameter CPCLRH.
The mean radius ${\hat{r}}_{\text{i}}$ is defined by

$${\hat{r}}_{\text{i}} = 1/2 \left( r_{\text{i}} + r_{\text{i+1}} \right)$$ [eq 14.5-9]

where $r_{\text{i}}$ is the radius of node $i$ .

Cladding melting is accounted for by using an augmented clad heat
capacity, ${C'}_{\text{p}}$ , when the clad temperature falls in the
melting band, where ${C'}_{\text{p}}$ is defined by:

$${C'}_{\text{p}} = C_{\text{p}} + \frac{\lambda}{\Delta T_{\text{me}}}$$ [eq 14.5-10]

where

 $C_{\text{p}}$ = is the normal specific heat of the solid cladding given
by the input parameter CPCL.

 $\lambda$ = is the latent heat of fusion which is evaluated as the difference
between the input values of energies of cladding at liquidus and
solidus, EGSELQ and EGSESO.

 $\Delta T_{\text{mc}}$ = is the difference in the liquidus and solidus
temperatures of the cladding which are input (see TESELQ and TESESO,
respectively).

Figure 14.5.1 Radial Node Numbering Scheme Used in Subroutine PLTECS for the Temperature Calculation of Cladding and Reflector in the Interaction Region

When entering or leaving the melting band, an adjustment o the computed
temperature is required to insure that energy is properly conserved in
the system. The specific heat of the cladding above the liquidus
temperature is given by the input value CPSE.

The coefficient of heat transfer $h_{2}$ is set equal to the gap
coefficient in the active fuel and blanket regions. In the plenum and
reflector regions, however, $h_{2}$ is set equal to zero to
simulate an adiabatic boundary condition at the inner cladding surface.
The form of the equations for $\left( \text{MC}_{\text{p}} \right)_{\text{i}}$ and
 $\left( ha \right)_{\text{i}}$ , for the reflector region is slightly modified to
correspond to a slab geometry, rather than a cylindrical one.

The heat-transfer coefficient $\left( ha \right)$ , and effective sink temperature
 $T_{6}$ for the outer surface of the cladding and reflector are
given by:

$$\left( ha \right)_{5} = \left( ha \right)_{\text{Na,cl}} + \left( ha \right)_{\text{fu,cl}} + \left( ha \right)_{\text{ff,cl}}$$ [eq 14.5-11]

$$\left( ha \right)_{5} = \left( ha \right)_{\text{Na,cl}} + \left( ha \right)_{\text{fu,cl}} + \left( ha \right)_{\text{ff,cl}}$$ [eq 14.5-12]

The three terms on the right-hand side of these equations account for
heat transfer from the cladding (or structure) to each component in the
channel: namely, sodium (and fission gases), moving fuel, and stationary
frozen fuel.

Eq. (14.5-12) is converted to a fully implicit difference equation in
time. This scheme was used to obtain numerical stability when analyzing
thin cladding without using excessively small PLUTO time increments.
This feature will be especially useful in the analysis of ablating clad
where the nodal heat capacities are shrinking to zero. The resulting
difference equations for each axial slice of the core are a set of
simultaneous equations for the nodal temperatures, which are solved by
the Thomas algorithm for tri-diagonal coefficient matrices.

[anchor: structure-temperature-calculation-in-the-interaction-region]

## 14.5.3. Structure Temperature Calculation in the Interaction Region

The temperature calculation in the subassembly hexcan wall or in the
flow tube of an experiment test section normally uses the same two-node
mesh structure as the remainder of the SAS4A code. However, when the
SAS4A input specifies one large and one rather small node width
( $w_{\text{small}} < 0.1 w_{\text{sr}}$ ), the width of the small node is
set to $w_{\text{small}} = 0.1 w_{\text{sr}}$ . This is done in order to
avoid stability problems in the explicit temperature calculation
performed in PLUTO2 or in LEVITATE. As for the pre-failure calculation
of the SAS node, it is recommended that the structure node facing the
coolant channel should be considerable thinner than that for the
structure node facing the intersubassembly gap. This is because the node
facing the coolant channel should be capable of rapidly responding to
changes in the transfer from coolant or molten fuel.

In order to treat the heat transfer between two unequal nodes
accurately, an approach is used in which the temperature profile in the
structure is approximated by a parabola rather than a straight line
between the two temperature nodes. This approach, which was originally
developed for LEVITATE, has been adopted in PLUTO2. It is described in
detail in Section 16.5.7.2.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[page: Part04/Ch14/integration.html]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[anchor: interaction-with-the-point-kinetics-and-the-primary-loop-module]

# 14.6. Interaction with the Point Kinetics and the Primary Loop Module

[anchor: interaction-with-the-point-kinetics-module]

## 14.6.1. Interaction With the Point Kinetics Module

In Section 14.1.2, the calculation in PLUTO2 of the specific power in
the fuel and the total power in an original pin node was described. This
was also discussed later when the heat source terms in the fuel pin and
in the channel were described. The calculation of the reactivity
feedbacks for channels in which PLUTO2 is active is based on fuel
temperature and mass distributions and coolant voiding distributions
calculated in PLUTO2 and passed to subroutine FEEDBK, where the
reactivity feedbacks are calculated.

In PLUTO2, the fuel mass in the fuel pin nodes can be relatively easily
calculated because the fixed Eulerian grid used for the in-pin fuel
motion is part of the grid on which the material worths are defined (see
Figure 14.1.4). The calculational grid in the coolant channel has
additional cells above and below the pin grid and is therefore indexed
differently. However, the axial spacing of the channel grid corresponds
to that of the fuel-pin grid. A problem associated with the calculation
of the fuel or sodium masses on the channel grid is the existence of
partial Lagrangian cells at the edges of the interaction region. Partial
Lagrangian cells such as the channel cell IFMIBT in Figure 14.1.4 contain
fuel and sodium that extend into the adjacent cell IFMIBT-1. For the
purpose of the reactivity calculation this fuel and sodium are included
in cell IFMIBT-1 as opposed to the approach in the hydrodynamics.

[anchor: coupling-with-the-primary-loop-module]

## 14.6.2. Coupling with the Primary Loop Module

The coupling between PLUTO2 and the primary loop module is quite simple
when the PRIMAR-1 option has been chosen (i.e., input parameter IPRION
set to a value not equal to 4). In this case, PLUTO2 uses the constant
outlet coolant plenum pressure PX which is input and an inlet coolant
plenum pressure which is determined by PRIMAR-1. PRIMAR-1 calculates the
steady-state pump head that is multiplied by an input table or function
during the transient (see Section 5.9). Moreover, PLUTO2 also uses the
table input for the inlet temperature history and the single input value
TUPL for the reentry temperature at the outlet. However, PLUTO2 will not
feed back any information to the primary loop module if the PRIMAR-1
option has been chosen.

If the PRIMAR-4 option has been chosen (IPRION=4), PLUTO2 will use the
time-dependent inlet and outlet pressures which are calculated by
PRIMAR-4. This is done in the following way:

$$P_{\text{inlet}} \left( t \right) = P_{\text{inlet}} \left( t_{\text{PR1}} \right) \
 + \left( t - t_{\text{PR1}} \right) \cdot \frac{\partial \text{P}_{\text{inlet}}}{\partial \text{t}}$$ [eq 14.6-1]

where

 $P_{\text{inlet}} \left( t_{\text{PR1}} \right)$ is the PRIMAR-4 calculated
inlet pressure at the beginning of the current primary loop time step.

 $\frac{\partial \text{P}_{\text{inlet}}}{\partial \text{t}}$ is the PRIMAR-4
calculated rate or inlet pressure change during the current primary loop
time step.

The outlet pressure is calculated in the same manner:

$$P_{\text{outlet}} \left( t \right) = P_{\text{outlet}} \left( t_{\text{PR1}} \right) \
 + \left( t - t_{\text{PR1}} \right) \cdot \frac{\partial \text{P}_{\text{outlet}}}{\partial \text{t}}$$ [eq 14.6-2]

PLUTO2 also uses the time-dependent inlet and outlet temperatures
calculated by PRIMAR4. Since inlet and outlet temperatures change
slowly, only the average values over each PRIMAR-4 step are used in
PLUTO2.

When the PRIMAR-4 option has been chosen, PLUTO2 provides PRIMAR-4 with
total sodium masses ejected into or received from the inlet or outlet
plena during a primary loop time step:

$$\Delta M_{\text{Na,ic,inlet}} = N_{\text{subas,ic}} \int_{t_{\text{PR1}}}^{t_{\text{PR2}}}{W_{\text{Na,inlet}} \text{dt}}$$ [eq 14.6-3]

and

$$\Delta M_{\text{Na,ic,outlet}} = N_{\text{subas,ic}} \int_{t_{\text{PR1}}}^{t_{\text{PR2}}}{W_{\text{Na,outlet}} \text{dt}}$$ [eq 14.6-4]

where

 $ic$ = SAS4A channel number.

 $t_{\text{PR1}}$ = time at the beginning of the PRIMAR-4 time
step.

 $t_{\text{PR2}}$ = time at the end of the PRIMAR-4 time step.

 $W_{\text{Na}}$ = sodium liquid and/or vapor mass flow rate.

PLUTO2 also provides PRIMAR-4 with the channel mass flow rates at the
end of the primary loop time step. As long as pure liquid sodium is
ejected into or received from the upper and lower plena, temporal
integrals over the sodium mass flow rate times the temperature of the
ejected sodium are also provided by PLUTO2. However, when the upper
liquid sodium slug has been ejected out of the subassembly outlet, the
additional heat added to the outlet plenum by the subsequently ejected
two-phase sodium (which condenses in the plenum) and the ejected fuel
during a primary loop time step is calculated by PLUTO2 for use in
PRIMAR-4 (see Section 5.11.1):

$$\begin{split} \Delta E_{\text{v,ic}} = \left\lbrack \lambda_{\text{Na}} \cdot x_{\text{Na}} \cdot W_{\text{Na}} + u_{\text{fu}} {\rho'}_{\text{fu}} \cdot \text{AXMX} \cdot \left\{ e_{\text{fu}} - \text{EGFUTE} \left( T_{\text{Na}} \right) \right\} \right\rbrack \\
 N_{\text{sibas,ic}} \cdot \left( t_{\text{PR2}} - t_{\text{PR1}} \right)\end{split}$$ [eq 14.6-5]

where

 $x_{\text{Na}}, \lambda_{\text{Na}}$ is the quality of the two-phase sodium
and the enthalpy of evaporation of sodium in the highest coolant node is
SAS4A channel $ic$ .

EGFUTE See Eq. (14.4-179).

The quantities
 ${\rho'}_{\text{fu}}, e_{\text{fu}}, T_{\text{Na}}$ in Eq. (14.6-5)
all refer to the highest coolant node HTP. A similar equation is
used for the inlet plenum also. Eq. (5.11-2) in Chapter 5, which
calculates an estimate of the flow into or out of each SAS4A channel,
requires several coefficients for each SAS4 channel. These coefficients
are calculated before boiling by the single-phase hydraulics module,
then by the boiling module, and, after fuel-pin failure, they are
calculated by PLUTO2 or LEVITATE, depending on which module is active in
a certain channel.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[page: Part04/Ch14/code-logic.html]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[anchor: code-logic-description]

# 14.7. Code Logic Description

[anchor: pluto2-initialization]

## 14.7.1. PLUTO2 Initialization

For the initialization of PLUTO2, the flow diagrams in Figure 14.7.1 and
14.7-2 are relevant. The flowchart in Figure 14.7.1 shows part of the
logic flow in subroutine FUINIT (FU**EL MOTION **INITIALIZATION) in
which the decision is made whether PLUTO2 or LEVITATE should be
initialized once subroutine FAILUR (which is called from the DEFORM
Transient driver DFORM3 or from TSTHRM if cladding motion has already
begun) has predicted pin failure. A minimum fuel melt fraction equal to
the input parameter FMELTM must exist in the failing node before PLUTO2
or LEVITATE is allowed to be initiated. The decision which one of the
two modules, PLUTO2 or LEVITATE, is to be initiated depends on the
existence and size of a boiling region at the time of failure and
whether the pins are predicted to fail into a voided or unvoided region
of the channel. If there is no boiling region, as in a TOP accident, or
if the pins fail into the liquid region of a partially voided channel,
PLUTO2 will be initiated because of its capability of treating FCIs and
sweepout of particulate fuel. If there is a large voided region in the
channel, in which cladding motion may already have started, LEVITATE,
which is designed for voided-channel fuel motion analysis, will be
initiated. For the case of fuel pins failing into a multi-bubble boiling
region, PLUTO2 will be initiated if the average void fraction in this
region is below 70% at the time of pin failure. If the average void
fraction is greater than 70%, it will be a LEVITATE case which has to be
started by first initiating PLUTO2. In this case, the flag ILEPLI is set
to 1. The flow diagram in Figure 14.7.2 shows that a switch to LEVITATE
will be immediately made in this case, once the PLUTO2 driver routine
(PLUDRV) is entered.

The flow diagram shown in Figure 14.7.2 shows how PLUTO2 and LEVITATE are
actually initiated. In a PLUTO2 case, a check is first made to determine
whether cladding motion has already begun. This is an unlikely situation
that cold only come about if liquid sodium reentered into the boiling
region after cladding motion had begun. This would have prevented the
selection of LEVITATE. Since PLUTO2 cannot handle this situation,
control is returned to subroutine FAILUR, and no fuel motion initiation
will take place until the run has proceeded further and led to a more
extensive boiling region that allows the initiation of LEVITATE.

In subroutine PLSAIN (PLUTO2 SAS4A COOLANT CHANNEL
INITIALIZATION), the coolant mass, temperature and velocity
distributions are initialized. In the case of a nonboiling channel, this
is relatively straightforward, whereas it is quite complex to properly
translate these quantities from the Lagrangian grid of a multi-bubble
boiling module to the fixed Eulerian PLUTO2 grid.

In subroutine PLINPT (PLUTO2 INPUT), the coolant channel
geometry is set up, all arrays relevant for the multi-component flow in
the channels are initialized, and the geometry of the molten fuel cavity
in the pins is established. The size of the latter depends on the radial
and axial extent of fuel melting calculated by TSHTRN (for nonboiling
cases) or TSHTRV (for cases in which boiling had already begun) and on
the fuel-pin grid deformation calculated by DEFORM. The radially
averaged internal fuel energy in the molten cavity is calculated based
on the radial temperature profile in the cavity. The total fuel and
dissolved fission-gas masses in all cavity nodes are also calculated.
The latter are based on the DEFORM calculated values.

In subroutine PLSET (PLUTO2 SETUP), the molten cavity pressure,
which is calculated by DEF”ORM and which can also be input (see input
value PCFAIL) for parametric studies, is used to determine the mass of
free fission gas in each cavity node. This was discussed earlier in more
detail in Section 14.2.2. All other arrays necessary for the in-pin
calculation are also initialized. Moreover, several channel arrays for
the cladding and structure temperature calculations in the interaction
region are initialized in this subroutine.

Subroutine PLSET1 (PLUTO2 SETUP1) initializes parameters
necessary for the temperature calculation in the liquid coolant slugs,
which is performed in subroutine PLCOOL. Moreover, parameters necessary
for the temperature calculation in the structure, plenum cladding and
reflectors outside the PLUTO2 interaction zone (which is performed in
subroutine PLSTR) are initialized in PLSET1.

The flowchart in Figure 14.7.2 also shows that LEVITAE uses most or all of
the PLUTO2 initialization routines. However, LEVITATE also needs
subroutine LESAIN for the case of a single large initial boiling bubble
and subroutine LECLIN if cladding motion has started prior to pin
failure. It can also be seen in Figure 14.7.2 that the flag ICALC is set
to 2 on the LEVITATE branch and 3 on the PLUTO2 branch. This flag
controls whether the LEVITATE driver routine LEVDRV or the PLUTO2 driver
routine PLUDRV will be called when the SAS4A transient driver TSTHRM is
executed during the next coolant time step.

Figure 14.7.1 First Part of the Flow Chart of Subroutine FUINIT Showing
the Logic Used in Determining Whether the PLUTO2 Module of the LEVITATE
Module is to be Activated. The Branch PLU or LEV Implies that the PLUTO2
Module of the LEVITATE Module is Respectively Activated. The Details of
Branches PLU and LEV are Shown in Figure 14.7.2.

Figure 14.7.2 Second Part of the Flow Chart of Subroutine FUINIT Showing the Initialization of the PLUTO2 and LEVITATE Modules

[anchor: time-step-considerations-and-auxiliary-subroutines]

## 14.7.2. Time Step Considerations and Auxiliary Subroutines

The PLUTO2 flow logic has already been described in considerable detail
in Section 14.1.2. Here, only the different time steps involved and the
calling of auxiliary subroutines will be discussed.

The flow diagram of the PLUTO2 driver routine PLUDRV, which already
appeared in Section 14.1.2, is also shown in Figure 14.7.3 in order to
have a complete set of PLUTO2 flow diagrams in this section.

The PLUTO2 driver routine can be called by the SAS4A transient driver
TSTHRM at the beginning or at any time during a primary loop time step.
The latter is common for all SAS4A calculational channels and is smaller
than or equal to the main (point kinetics) time step, which is also
common for all SAS4A channels.

Before PLUDRV is called for the first time in a given channel, the
PLUTO2 time (TIMEPL), which is counted from the time of pin failure, is
set to zero in the FAILUR routine. Moreover, the time of pin failure
relative to the time of the accident initiation is recorded in the
channel-dependent variable TMPLIN.

When PLUDRV is entered, TIMEPL is advanced by adding the PLUTO2 time
step right after subroutine PLSET2 (which initializes temporary
variables) has been called (see fig. 14.7-3). The very first PLUTO2
time-step size used is the input constant DTPLIN which is the initial
and the minimum PLUTO2 time-step size. After the subroutines PLIPIN and
PL2PIN have performed the in-pin calculation, a new time-step size for
the in-pin motion is calculated as described in Section 14.2.8. Once all
the subroutines calculating the channel fuel and sodium/gas dynamics
have been called, a new time-step size for the in-pin motion is
calculated as described in Section 14.2.8. Once all the subroutines
calculating the channel fuel and sodium/gas dynamics have been called,
a new time-step is calculated for the channel hydrodynamics (see Section 14.4.6.4). This is compared with the time-step size calculated for the
in-pin motion and the smaller of the two will be used as the new PLUTO2
time-step size if it is larger than the above-mentioned input value
DTPLIN. If it is smaller than DTPLIN, the latter will be used as the new
PLUTO2 time-step size. Also, if it is larger than $2 \times 10^{-4}$ s,
it will be set to this value. Moreover, if the newly determined time
step extends beyond the end of a heat-transfer time step, it will be cut
back such that the new PLUTO2 time will coincide with the end of the
heat-transfer time step. This is possible since the heat-transfer
subroutine PLHTR calculates only the fuel temperatures in the region
determined by the interaction region (see Figure 14.1.4 in Section 14.1)
and the fuel and cladding temperatures outside the interaction region.
None of these temperatures are changing rapidly relative to PLUTO2
time-step sizes.

The determination of the heat-transfer time step is made using a series
of tests. First, the initial and maximum heat-transfer time step is set
to 1 ms, which is about an order of magnitude smaller than the
characteristic heat-transfer time for cladding. If the initial or any
later time step is larger than the current primary loop time step, it is
set equal to the latter. Since the primary loop time step has to be less
than or equal to the main (point kinetics) time step, it is, of course,
also limited by the main time step.

The heat-transfer time step is not only used for the heat-transfer
calculation of all the fuel and the cladding reflector, and the
structure temperature calculation outside the interaction region, but
also for the temperature calculation in the liquid sodium slugs. Since
the latter involves not only heat conduction from the walls but also
heat convection from the coolant cells above and below the one
considered, the heat-transfer time step is also limited by a Courant
condition based on the liquid slug velocity.

The flow diagram in Figure 14.7.3 shows that PLUTO2 retains control and
advances the solution using PLUTO2 time steps until the end of the
primary loop time step is reached. This is different from the
single-phase hydraulics driver TSCL0 and the boiling module driver
TSBOIL, which return control to the SAS4A transient driver TSTHRM after
every coolant time step. The latter is the basic time step in the
modules controlled by TSCL0 and TSBOIL. In PLUTO2 (and LEVITATE) the
coolant time step is set equal to the primary loop time step. PLUTO2 or
LEVITATE thus also return control to the transient SAS4A driver at the
end of this “artificial” coolant time step.

Several auxiliary subroutines used in the PLUTO2 module are not shown in
the flow chart in Figure 14.7.3. These include the function subroutine
TEFUES, which calculates fuel temperatures for a given internal fuel
energy and TESEEG which calculates steel temperatures for a given
internal steel energy. Function subroutines EGFUTE and EGSETE perform
the inverse operation for fuel and steel, respectively, i.e.,
calculating internal energies for a given temperature.

Several auxiliary subroutines and subroutine functions are called by the
subroutine PLHTR performing the heat-transfer calculation in the solid
annulus of the fuel pin and in the cladding outside the interaction
region. PLHTR is a derivative of subroutine TSHTN3 described in more
detail in Section 3.3.1 of Chapter 3. The most important auxiliary
subroutine called by PLHTR is INVRT3, which inverts a tri-diagonal
matrix. Subroutines KFUEL and KCLAD calculate the fuel and cladding
conductivity, respectively. Subroutine CFUEL calculates the heat
capacity of the fuel and TSHTN5 corrects fuel and cladding temperatures
for the heat of fusion, if melting is occurring. Subroutine HBSMPL and
function subroutine HBFND calculate the gap conductance.

Figure 14.7.3 Flow Chart of the PLUTO2 Driver Sub routine PLUDRV


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[page: Part04/Ch14/input-output.html]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[anchor: description-of-input-to-and-output-of-the-pluto2-module]

# 14.8. Description of Input to and Output of the PLUTO2 Module

[anchor: pluto2-input]

## 14.8.1. PLUTO2 Input

The SAS4A input variables required specifically by the PLUTO2 fuel
motion model are given in Table 14.8.1 with their suggested values in
MKS units (kilogram, meter, second, degree Kelvin). Also indicated in
Table 14.8.1 are some particular sections of the documentation in which
the input variables are explained, or some particular equations in which
the variables are used. The first column of the table gives the location
of the variable in the complete input deck of the SAS4A code. The second
and the third columns give the Fortran variable names used in the code
and the SAS4A input description, and the corresponding symbols, if any,
used in the mathematical equations in the documentation.

[anchor: pluto2-output]

## 14.8.2. PLUTO2 Output

The main PLUTO2 output (see Figure 14.8.1) for a given SAS4A channel (the
channel number is shown at the top of each output page) is separated
into two major sections. One of these sections (output items 1 to 7 in
Figure 14.8.1) deals with the in-pin motion and the fuel and fission-gas
ejection from the pins and the other section (output items 8 to 18 in
Figure 14.8.1) deals with the motion of fuel, sodium, and fission gas in
the coolant channels. All output is strictly in SI units (e.g., kg, m,
s, K, joules, pascals, etc.). At the time of entry to PLUTO2 module, the
variables of output item 18 are printed with the message “PLUTO STARTS”
and then follow output items 1 to 18.

Table 14.8.1 List of Input Variables Required by the PLUTO2 Fuel Motion Model

 | 

 | 
SAS4A

Input

Location

 | 
 | 
Fortran

Variable

 | 
 | 
Symbol
 | 
 | 
Describing

Section

 | 
 | 
Equation

Number

 | 
 | 
Suggested

Value in

MKS Units

 | 
 | 
Comments
 | 

 | 

 | 
Block 1, INPCOM
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 

 | 
37
 | 
 | 
KFAILP
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.3.3
 | 
 | | 
 | 
0
 | 
 | 
Mechanistic axial propagation of pin failure is opted.
 | 

 | 
38
 | 
 | 
NCPLEV
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.3.4, 14.4.3.2
 | 
 | | 
 | 
3
 | 
 | 
The fuel motion calculation is switched from PLUTO2 to LEVITATE when 3 axial cladding nodes have exceeded the cladding liquidus temperature.
 | 

 | 
Block 13, PMATCM
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 

 | 
1124
 | 
 | 
RGAS
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.2.6
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.2-40)
 | 
 | 
130.637
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1125
 | 
 | 
CINAFO
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-43),

Eq. (14.4-44),

Eq. (14.4-96)

 | 
 | | 
 | 
For a consistent input, the coolant film volume fraction (CINAFO) should be evaluated from cladding and structure film thicknesses WFO and WFSOO of channel 1. If CINAFO so evaluated for another channel disagrees with the above value, a consistent input is not possible.
 | 

 | 
1126
 | 
 | 
CIBBIN
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.1
 | 
 | | 
 | 
0.7
 | 
 | 
See Section 14.4.3.1.
 | 

 | 
1127
 | 
 | 
CIREFU
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-205)
 | 
 | 
2100.0
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1128
 | 
 | 
CIFRFU
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-205)
 | 
 | 
0.02
 | 
 | 
Page 264 of Ref. [14-49].
 | 

 | 
1129
 | 
 | 
CIFUMO
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-205)
 | 
 | 
0.5
 | 
 | 
All intra-pin axial momentum of the fuel perhaps will not be retained after ejection into coolant channel.
 | 

 | 
1130
 | 
 | 
CIVOID
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.4.1.1
 | 
 | | 
 | 
0.5
 | 
 | 
See Section 14.4.3.4.1.1.
 | 

 | 
1131
 | 
 | 
CIA1
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.4.2.1
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-112)
 | 
 | 
1.0
 | 
 | 
A recent theoretical evaluation [14-51] gives CIA1 = 3.3 to 5.0 but a preliminary calibration of the PLUTO2 module in the SAS4A version 1.0 has been done with CIA1 = 1.0
 | 

 | 
1132
 | 
 | 
CIA2
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.4.2.1
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-72),

Eq. (14.4-116)

 | 
 | 
2.0
 | 
 | 
See Section 14.4.3.4.2.1.
 | 

 | 
1133
 | 
 | 
CIA3
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-30),

Eq. (14.4-121)

 | 
 | 
0.0158
 | 
 | 
This value is good for mixed oxide fuel but not for metal alloy fuel
 | 

 | 
1134
 | 
 | 
CIA4
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.4.1
 | 
 | | 
 | 
0.6
 | 
 | 
CIA4 should e larger than CIVOID.
 | 

 | 
1135
 | 
 | 
CIA5
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-195)
 | 
 | 
-1.7
 | 
 | 
Ref. [14.49, 14-63].
 | 

 | 
1136
 | 
 | 
CIA6
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.6.1.1
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-202)
 | 
 | 
0.4272
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1139
 | 
 | 
CPFU
 | 
 | 
 $C_{\text{p,fu}}$ 
 | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.2-55),

Eq. (14.4-166),

Eq. (14.4-170)

 | 
 | 
500.0
 | 
 | 
Ref. [14-59].
 | 

 | 
1140
 | 
 | 
CDFU
 | 
 | 
 $k_{\text{fu}}$ 
 | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-152)
 | 
 | 
3.0
 | 
 | 
Ref [14-60].
 | 

 | 
1141
 | 
 | 
CMNL
 | 
 | 
 $K_{\text{Nf}}$ 
 | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-50)
 | 
 | 
4.6D-10
 | 
 | 
The compressibility of liquid sodium is very temperature-dependent and this value [14-60] corresponds to 1200 K, roughly the sodium temperature in the vicinity of pin failure at the time of failure.
 | 

 | 
1142
 | 
 | 
CDNL
 | 
 | 
 $K_{\text{Nl}}$ 
 | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-89)
 | 
 | 
50.0
 | 
 | 
This is liquid sodium thermal conductivity at about 1200 K [14-59].
 | 

 | 
1143
 | 
 | 
CIETFU
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-39),

Eq. (14.4-41)

 | 
 | 
0.1
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1144
 | 
 | 
CDVG
 | 
 | 
 $k_{\text{vg}}$ 
 | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-104)
 | 
 | 
0.067
 | 
 | 
The thermal conductivity of a gas mixture is very dependent on its temperature and composition. This value of CDVG is sodium vapor thermal conductivity at 1500 K [14-61], roughly 300 K higher than the assumed sodium temperature in the vicinity of pin failure at the time of failure.
 | 

 | 
1145
 | 
 | 
VIFI
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
9.5D-5
 | 
 | 
This is xenon viscosity at about 1500 K extrapolated from temperature-dependent measured data [14-62] by fitting an equation of the form T0.89 (T = xenon temperature). It is not yet used in the code.
 | 

 | 
1146
 | 
 | 
CFNACN
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-99)
 | 
 | 
6.0D4
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1147
 | 
 | 
CFNAEV
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-100)
 | 
 | 
6.0D5
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1148
 | 
 | 
FIFNGB
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.2-18)
 | 
 | 
0.1
 | 
 | 
Also see suggested values of DEF”ORM input in Chapter 8.
 | 

 | 
1149
 | 
 | 
VINL
 | 
 | 
 $\mu_{\text{Nl}}$ 
 | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-95)
 | 
 | 
1.5D-4
 | 
 | 
This is liquid sodium viscosity at about 1200 K [14-61].
 | 

 | 
1150
 | 
 | 
VIVG
 | 
 | 
 $\mu_{\text{vg}}$ 
 | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-95)

Eq. (14.4-114)

 | 
 | 
2.2D-5
 | 
 | 
This viscosity of a gas mixture is very dependent on its temperature and composition. This value of VIVG is sodium vapor viscosity at about 1500 K [14-61].
 | 

 | 
1151
 | 
 | 
EGFUSO
 | 
 | 
 $e_{\text{fu,sol}}$ 
 | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-46),

Eq. (14.4-55)

 | 
 | 
1.0D6
 | 
 | 
Ref. [14-59].
 | 

 | 
1152
 | 
 | 
DZPLIN
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.2.3
 | 
 | | 
 | 
0.02
 | 
 | 
DXPLIN must be smaller than the shortest axial mesh cell in channel.
 | 

 | 
1153
 | 
 | 
CFCOFV
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-117),

Eq. (14.4-142)

 | 
 | 
6.0D4
 | 
 | 
This parameter is not yet used in the code.
 | 

 | 
1155
 | 
 | 
C1VIPR
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.2.4
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.2-46)
 | 
 | 
3.0D-3
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1156
 | 
 | 
C2VIPR
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.2.4
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.2-45)
 | 
 | 
0.0
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1157
 | 
 | 
SUFU
 | 
 | 
 $\sigma_{\text{fu}}$ 
 | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-201)
 | 
 | 
0.45
 | 
 | 
For a consistent input, this value should equal the value input in GAMMA [14-59].
 | 

 | 
1158
 | 
 | 
RAFPLA
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.1
 | 
 | | 
 | 
2.5D-4
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1159
 | 
 | 
RAFPSM
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.1
 | 
 | | 
 | 
2.5D-4
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1160
 | 
 | 
VFNALQ
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.1
 | 
 | | 
 | 
0.33
 | 
 | 
See Section 14.4.3.1.
 | 

 | 
1161
 | 
 | 
EGBBLY
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.2
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-51),

Eq. (14.4-55)

 | 
 | 
EGFUSO + UFMELT(1) ⨉ 0.5
 | 
 | 
Fuel freezing is initiated when the fuel internal energy drops below the energy corresponding to 0.5 melt fraction. The value of the latter energy should be evaluated by adding 0.5 of the latent heat of fusion of fuel type 1 (UFMELT) to the solidus internal energy.
 | 

 | 
1162
 | 
 | 
VIFULQ
 | 
 | 
 $\mu_{\text{fu,liq}}$ 
 | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.2-36),

Eq. (14.2-47),

Eq. (14.4-205)

 | 
 | 
4.3D-3
 | 
 | 
Ref. [14-59].
 | 

 | 
1163
 | 
 | 
VFNARE
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.1
 | 
 | | 
 | 
0.8
 | 
 | 
VFNARE > VFNALQ
 | 

 | 
1164
 | 
 | 
DTPLIN
 | 
 | 
 $\Delta t_{\text{PL}}$ 
 | 
 | 
14.2.8, 14.4.6.4
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-41),

Eq. (14.4-29)

 | 
 | 
2.5D-5
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1165
 | 
 | 
AXMX
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.2.5, 14.4.1
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.2-2),

Eq. (14.4-1)

 | 
 | 
1.0
 | 
 | 
Although the results of the code (except the volume fractions) are independent of the value of AXMS, the volume fractions are meaningful if AXMX is set equal to the cross-sectional if AXMS is set equal to the cross-sectional area within the outer surface of the subassembly hexcan.
 | 

 | 
1166
 | 
 | 
EPCH
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.2.4
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.2-1)
 | 
 | 
1.0
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1167
 | 
 | 
TIPLMX
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.1.2

(last paragraph)

 | 
 | | 
 | 
1.5
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1168
 | 
 | 
DTPLP
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
2.0D-3
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1169
 | 
 | 
FNMELT
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.2.2, 14.2.3
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.2-12),

Eq. (14.2-14)

 | 
 | 
0.9
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1170
 | 
 | 
CIRTFS
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.2-21),

Eq. (14.4-20)

 | 
 | 
16.67
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1172
 | 
 | 
CIFUFZ
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.3
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-85)
 | 
 | 
1.0
 | 
 | 
It is not yet used in the code.
 | 

 | 
1173
 | 
 | 
TIFP
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.1
 | 
 | | 
 | 
0.015
 | 
 | 
It makes no difference if both fuel particle radii are equal.
 | 

 | 
1174
 | 
 | 
CIANIN
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.3
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-78)
 | 
 | 
0.5
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1175
 | 
 | 
TEFAIL
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-78)
 | 
 | 
TESOL(1)
 | 
 | 
It should be set equal to the solidus temperature of cladding type 1 (location 810).
 | 

 | 
1176
 | 
 | 
FNARME
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.3-10),

Eq. (14.3-12)

 | 
 | 
0.9
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1177
 | 
 | 
PRFAIL
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.3-13)
 | 
 | 
0.0
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1178
 | 
 | 
EGMN
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.1
 | 
 | | 
 | 
EGFUSO + UFMELT(1) ⨉ 0.3
 | 
 | 
EGMN should be smaller than EGBBLY. It is assumed that continuous fuel flow regimes cannot be initiated below the energy corresponding to 0.3 melt fraction.
 | 

 | 
1179
 | 
 | 
HCFFMI
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-123),

Eq. (14.4-130)

 | 
 | 
1.0D5
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1180
 | 
 | 
HCFUBB
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-137),

Eq. (14.4-141)

 | 
 | 
3.0D4
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1181
 | 
 | 
FNHTFU
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
0.1
 | 
 | 
It is not yet used in the code.
 | 

 | 
1184
 | 
 | 
TECLMN
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.2
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-53)
 | 
 | 
TESOL(1)
 | 
 | 
The value should be chosen equal to the solidus temperature of cladding type 1 (TESOL) based on the consideration that cladding at solidus cannot provide support for freezing fuel.
 | 

 | 
1185
 | 
 | 
TECLRL
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.4.3.2
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-65)
 | 
 | 
TELIQ(1)
 | 
 | 
See Section 14.4.3.2.
 | 

 | 
1186
 | 
 | 
CIHCFU
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.2.6
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.2-35)
 | 
 | 
0.0158
 | 
 | 
See location 1133.
 | 

 | 
1187
 | 
 | 
HCCLMI
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-102),

Eq. (14.4-103)

 | 
 | 
1.0D5
 | 
 | | 

 | 
1188
 | 
 | 
CMFU
 | 
 | 
 $K_{\text{fu,liq}}$ 
 | 
 | | 
 | 
Eq. (14.2-40)
 | 
 | 
6.0D-11
 | 
 | 
The compressibility of liquid mixed oxide fuel is very dependent on temperature and the chosen value is for fuel at 4000 K [14-60].
 | 

 | 
1195
 | 
 | 
CDCL
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.5.2
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.5-7)
 | 
 | 
32.0
 | 
 | 
This value is solid cladding thermal conductivity averaged over the temperature range 1200 K to the cladding solidus temperature of 1700 K [14-59].
 | 

 | 
1196
 | 
 | 
CPCL
 | 
 | 
 $C_{\text{p}}$ 
 | 
 | 
14.5.2
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.5-10)
 | 
 | 
655.0
 | 
 | 
This value is the cladding specific heat averaged over the temperature range 1200 K to the solidus temperature of 1700 K [14-59].
 | 

 | 
1197
 | 
 | 
CPCLRH
 | 
 | 
 $\rho_{\text{i}} C_{\text{p,i}}$ 
 | 
 | 
14.5.2
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.5-6)
 | 
 | 
7400*CPCL
 | 
 | 
This value is obtained using the cladding specific heat CPCL (location 1196) and a cladding density of 74000 kg/m3 averaged over the range 1200 K to the solidus temperature of 1700 K [14-59].
 | 

 | 
1198
 | 
 | 
RHSLBT
 | 
 | 
 $\rho_{\text{Nl},\text{ls}}$ 
 | 
 | 
14.4.6.3
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-226),

Eq. (14.4-228)

 | 
 | 
728.0
 | 
 | 
This is liquid sodium density at about 1200 K [14-61].
 | 

 | 
1199
 | 
 | 
RHSLTP
 | 
 | 
 $\rho_{\text{Nl},\text{us}}$ 
 | 
 | 
14.4.6.3
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.4-227),

Eq. (14.4-228)

 | 
 | 
0.975 *

RHSLBT

 | 
 | 
It is assumed that the temperature difference between the upper and lower liquid coolant slugs is about half of the coolant temperature rise in core (ΔTcore), and the corresponding density difference is 2.5% for (ΔTcore) of about 150K. The effect of the transient heat-up of the coolant on this estimate of the input has been ignored.
 | 

 | 
1201
 | 
 | 
COEFDL(2)
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
9.3D-5
 | 
 | 
Ref. [14-59].
 | 

 | 
1210
 | 
 | 
EGSESO
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.5.2
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.5-10)
 | 
 | 
0.834D6
 | 
 | 
Ref. [14-59].
 | 

 | 
1211
 | 
 | 
EGSELQ
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.5.2
 | 
 | 
Eq. (14.5-10)
 | 
 | 
EGSESO +

UEMELT(1)

 | 
 | 
This value is obtained by adding the latent heat of fusion of cladding type 1 (location 816) to the solidus internal energy.
 | 

 | 
1212
 | 
 | 
CPSE
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.5.2
 | 
 | | 
 | 
774.0
 | 
 | 
This is the constant value of the cladding specific heat at temperatures above the liquidus [14-59].
 | 

 | 
1214
 | 
 | 
FNSROS
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
0.2
 | 
 | 
The structure thickness should be divided into two mesh intervals such that the mesh interval contacting the coolant has a thickness equal to 20% of the total thickness. For consistency, this parameter must be in agreement with the input structure mesh thicknesses in DSTIZ and DSTOZ.
 | 

 | 
1231
 | 
 | 
SRFMLE
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
1.0
 | 
 | 
Also see LEVITATE input description in Chapter 16.
 | 

 | 
Block 51, INPCHN
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 

 | 
71
 | 
 | 
NRPI1
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
NPIN
 | 
 | 
All pins are assumed to fail when the fuel pin failure criterion is satisfied.
 | 

 | 
74
 | 
 | 
IPSIZE
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
1
 | 
 | | 

 | 
75
 | 
 | 
IBUGPL
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
0
 | 
 | | 

 | 
76
 | 
 | 
ICFINE
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
0
 | 
 | | 

 | 
77
 | 
 | 
IPRINT
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
0
 | 
 | | 

 | 
78
 | 
 | 
IPLOT
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
2
 | 
 | | 

 | 
79
 | 
 | 
IBGO
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
0
 | 
 | | 

 | 
80
 | 
 | 
IBSTOP
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
0
 | 
 | | 

 | 
81
 | 
 | 
IBNEW
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
0
 | 
 | | 

 | 
82
 | 
 | 
IPGO
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
0
 | 
 | | 

 | 
83
 | 
 | 
IPSTOP
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
2000
 | 
 | | 

 | 
84
 | 
 | 
IPNEW
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
20
 | 
 | | 

 | 
Block 65, FUELIN
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 

 | 
2
 | 
 | 
FMELTM
 | 
 | | 
 | 
14.1.2, 14.7.1
 | 
 | | 
 | 
0.2
 | 
 | 
This is required for the in-pin flow calculation of molten fuel.
 | 

 | 
19
 | 
 | 
PFFAIL
 | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | | 
 | 
0.0
 | 
 | 
This value of PCFAIL implies that the DEFORM-IV computed molten fuel cavity pressure at pin failure time will be used in the PLUTO2 calculation.
 | 

The PLUTO2 variables that are printed in output items 1 and 2 of Figure 14.8.1 are listed below:

 | 

 | 
ISTEP
 | 
 | 
Current main (point kinetics) time-step number.
 | 

 | 

 | 
TOTAL TIME
 | 
 | 
Time since beginning of transient. This is the regular SAS4A time.
 | 

 | 
ICYCLE
 | 
 | 
Current PLUTO2 calculational cycle for the SAS4A channel shown at the top for the page; the calculational step for the cycle number shown has just been completed at the time of a printout (see flowchart in Figure 14.7.3).
 | 

 | 
TIMEPL
 | 
 | 
PLUTO2 time. This is counted from the time of pin failure in this channel.
 | 

 | 
DTPLU
 | 
 | 
Current PLUTO2 time-step size.
 | 

 | 
In output item 3 total masses per subassembly are shown:
 | 
 | | 

 | 
SMFUPI
 | 
 | 
Current total mass of fuel in all failed pins of one subassembly.
 | 

 | 
SMFUST
 | 
 | 
Current total stationary (unmelted) fuel mass in all failed pins of one subassembly.
 | 

 | 
SMFUCA
 | 
 | 
Current total molten fuel mass in the pin cavities of all failed pins of one subassembly.
 | 

 | 
SMFICA
 | 
 | 
Current total free fission-gas mass in the pin cavities of all failed pins of one subassembly.
 | 

 | 
SMFSCA
 | 
 | 
Current total dissolved fission-gas mass in the cavities of all failed pins.
 | 

 | 
In output item 4, various other total masses for one subassembly are displayed:
 | 
 | | 

 | 
SMFUME
 | 
 | 
Total mass of fuel which has melted into the molten pin cavities of all failed pins in one subassembly since the time of pin failure.
 | 

 | 
SMFIME
 | 
 | 
Total mass of the free fission gas having been added to the cavities of all failed pins in one subassembly since the time of pin failure; the total mass of dissolved fission gas having been added t the pin cavities can be calculated by multiplying SMFIME by (1-FNFIGB)/FNFIGB where FNFIGB is the input fraction of fission gas on the grain boundaries of solid fuel.
 | 

 | 
SMFSRT
 | 
 | 
Total mass of free fission gas that has been generated due to coalescence of the small (dissolved) fission-gas bubbles in all the cavities of the failed pins of one subassembly.
 | 

 | 
SMFUEJ
 | 
 | 
Total mass of fuel that has been ejected into the coolant channels since pin failure. The sum of SMFUEJ and SMFUPI should always give the total initial fuel mass of the failed pins in the subassembly considered.
 | 

 | 
SMFIEJ
 | 
 | 
Total free fission-gas mass ejected from all failed pins per subassembly.
 | 

 | 
In output item 5, several columns showing various quantities per single pin node of failure group 1 are printed:
 | 
 | | 

 | 
K
 | 
 | 
Axial cell index of the pin grid; only cells which cover the molten cavity are shown. The pin gird actually extends from the bottom of the lower blanket to the top of the upper blanket.
 | 

 | 
IDISR
 | 
 | 
Gives information about cladding disruption and fuel and gas ejection. IF IDISR = 0, cladding is not ruptured; if IDISR = 2, cladding has ruptured but currently there is no ejection; if IDIST = 3, cladding has ruptured and fuel and gas ejections are going on.
 | 

 | 
DICA
 | 
 | 
Current diameter of the molten cavity in pin cell K.
 | 

 | 
AREAFR
 | 
 | 
Current are fraction of the molten pin cavity in pin cell K (i.e., cavity cross section/total fuel cross section).
 | 

 | 
FUSTAT
 | 
 | 
Stationary (solid) fuel mass in cell K. Stationary core fuel masses above and below the cavity are shown in output item 16.
 | 

 | 
FUELM
 | 
 | 
Mobile (cavity) fuel mass in cell K.
 | 

 | 
FUELSD
 | 
 | 
Fuel smear density in the cavity.
 | 

 | 
RHFUCA
 | 
 | 
Theoretical fuel density in the cavity, the fuel volume fraction in the cavity is the ratio of FUELSD to RHFUCA.
 | 

 | 
FISGM
 | 
 | 
Free fission-gas mass in the cavity part of cell K.
 | 

 | 
FISGDM
 | 
 | 
Dissolved fission-gas mass in the cavity part of cell K.
 | 

 | 
FNFIGB
 | 
 | 
Fraction of fission gas on the grain boundaries of the melting-in fuel; this fraction is instantaneously becoming free fission gas upon melt-in; it is presently a single input value.
 | 

 | 
FUEJ
 | 
 | 
Fuel mass ejected from pin cell K during the current time step.
 | 

 | 
FIEJ
 | 
 | 
Free fission-gas mass ejected from pin cell K during the current time step.
 | 

 | 
Output item 6 also prints several columns displaying variables pertaining to the in-pin motion:
 | 
 | | 

 | 
K
 | 
 | 
Axial cell index of the pin grid.
 | 

 | 
I
 | 
 | 
Axial index of the corresponding channel cell.
 | 

 | 
ZZPI
 | 
 | 
Axial location of the lower cell boundary in the pin cavity.
 | 

 | 
UFPI
 | 
 | 
Fuel/fission-gas mixture velocity at the lower cell boundary. All other pin cavity quantities shown are at the cell centers.
 | 

 | 
PRCA
 | 
 | 
Total physical pressure in-cavity cell K.
 | 

 | 
PRFVPI
 | 
 | 
Fuel vapor pressure component that is based on the average fuel temperature in cavity cell K.
 | 

 | 
PRVI
 | 
 | 
Artificial viscous pressure for damping numerical oscillations behind shock fronts.
 | 

 | 
EGFUCA
 | 
 | 
Average internal fuel energy in cavity cell K.
 | 

 | 
TEFUCA
 | 
 | 
Average fuel temperature in cavity cell K.
 | 

 | 
FUMESM
 | 
 | 
Mass of fuel that has molten into cavity cell K during the current time step.
 | 

 | 
FIMESM
 | 
 | 
Mass of free fission gas that has been added to cell K during the current time step due to fuel melt-in.
 | 

 | 
SIGCL
 | 
 | 
Cladding hoop stress for cell K; a negative value indicates that the channel pressure is higher than the cavity pressure. A value of zero indicates that the cladding in this cell has failed.
 | 

 | 
UTS
 | 
 | 
Ultimate tensile strength of the cladding material at temperature TECLIN (see output item 15).
 | 

 | 
Output item 7 shows the sum of the fuel and sodium voiding reactivities and also these two reactivities separately. These reactivities are for the entire SAS4A channel under consideration which usually contains more than one subassembly (see input quantity NSUBAS). For multi-channel runs the same fuel and sodium voiding reactivities are also printed out in the short reactivity printout which appears at the end of each main (point kinetics) time step.
 | 
 | | 

 | 
Output item 8 is the first row describing coolant channel variables; it prints several important integer quantities in the coolant channels (see also Figure 14.1.4):
 | 
 | | 

 | 
IFMIBT
 | 
 | 
Bottom cell of the interaction region (i.e., the region between the upper and lower sodium slugs).
 | 

 | 
IFMITP
 | 
 | 
Top cell of the interaction region.
 | 

 | 
IFFUBT
 | 
 | 
Bottom cell of the fuel region.
 | 

 | 
IFFUTP
 | 
 | 
Top cell of the fuel region.
 | 

 | 
IFFIBT
 | 
 | 
Bottom cell of fission-gas region.
 | 

 | 
IFFITP
 | 
 | 
Top cell of fission-gas region.
 | 

 | 
IFFVBT
 | 
 | 
Bottom cell of fuel vapor region.
 | 

 | 
IFFVTP
 | 
 | 
Top cell of fuel vapor region.
 | 

 | 
IFRIBT
 | 
 | 
Lowest cell containing a cladding rupture.
 | 

 | 
IFRITP
 | 
 | 
Highest cell containing a cladding rupture.
 | 

 | 
PRIN
 | 
 | 
Current inlet pressure.
 | 

 | 
PREX
 | 
 | 
Current outlet pressure.
 | 

 | 
Output item 9 shows total fuel and sodium masses in the interaction region and the fuel and sodium masses which have been ejected out of the top of the subassembly:
 | 
 | | 

 | 
TOFUMA
 | 
 | 
Total fuel mass in the coolant channels of one subassembly; this should be equal to SMFUEJ (see output item4) until fuel gets ejected out of the top of the subassembly.
 | 

 | 
FUMATP
 | 
 | 
Fuel mass ejected out of the top of one subassembly.
 | 

 | 
TONAMA
 | 
 | 
Total sodium mass in the interaction region of one subassembly.
 | 

 | 
TPNAMA
 | 
 | 
Sodium mass ejected out of the top of one subassembly.
 | 

 | 
Output item 10 shows total fission-gas masses:
 | 
 | | 

 | 
TOFIMA
 | 
 | 
Total mass of free fission-gas in the interaction region of one subassembly.
 | 

 | 
TODGCH
 | 
 | 
Total dissolved fission-gas mass in the interaction region of one subassembly.
 | 

 | 
TODGCL
 | 
 | 
Total dissolved fission-gas mass in the plated-out fuel on the cladding and structure (this is included in TODGCH discussed above).
 | 

 | 
FIMATP
 | 
 | 
Total free and dissolved gas masses ejected out of the top of one subassembly.
 | 

 | 
Output item 11 also shows total fission-gas masses per subassembly:
 | 
 | | 

 | 
TOFIDG
 | 
 | 
Total free and dissolved fission-gas masses in all subchannels and in all failed pins of one subassembly.
 | 

 | 
TODG
 | 
 | 
Total dissolved fission-gas in all subchannels and in the cavities of all failed pins of one subassembly.
 | 

 | 
TOFI
 | 
 | 
Total free fission gas in the cavities of all failed pins and in all subchannels of one subassembly.
 | 

 | 
TOFIST
 | 
 | 
Total fission-gas mass in the stationary (unmelted) fuel of all failed pins in a subassembly (only one type of gas is currently treated in the solid part of the fuel pins in SAS4A).
 | 

 | 
Output item 12 shows channel interface locations and velocities of the various component regions (see Figure 14.1.4 in Section 14.1):
 | 
 | | 

 | 
SLIFBT(1)
 | 
 | 
Location of the upper slug interface of the lower coolant slug, which is also the location of the lower interaction zone boundary.
 | 

 | 
SLIFBT(2)
 | 
 | 
Velocity of the upper slug interface of the lower coolant slug.
 | 

 | 
SLIFTP(1)
 | 
 | 
Location of the lower slug interface of the upper coolant slug.
 | 

 | 
SLIFTP(2)
 | 
 | 
Velocity of the lower slug interface of the upper coolant slug.
 | 

 | 
FUIFBT(1)
 | 
 | 
Location of the lower boundary of the region containing fuel.
 | 

 | 
FUIFBT(2)
 | 
 | 
Velocity of the lower boundary of the region containing fuel.
 | 

 | 
FUIFTP(1)
 | 
 | 
Location of the upper boundary of the region containing fuel.
 | 

 | 
FUIFTP(2)
 | 
 | 
Velocity of the upper boundary of the region containing fuel.
 | 

 | 
FIIFBT(1)
 | 
 | 
Location of the lower boundary of the region containing free fission gas.
 | 

 | 
FIIFTP(1)
 | 
 | 
Location of the upper boundary of the region containing free fission gas.
 | 

 | 
Output item 13 shows several columns of variables pertaining to individual channels cells:
 | 
 | | 

 | 
I
 | 
 | 
Axial channel index.
 | 

 | 
K
 | 
 | 
Index of pin cavity cell which is at the same elevation as channel cell I.
 | 

 | 
ZC
 | 
 | 
Location of the lower boundary of cell I.
 | 

 | 
UMCH
 | 
 | 
Velocity of the mixture of liquid sodium, sodium vapor, free fission gas and fuel vapor at the lower boundary of cell I (i.e., at ZC).
 | 

 | 
UFCH
 | 
 | 
Velocity of the liquid or solid fuel at the lower boundary of cell I (i.e., at ZC).
 | 

 | 
PRCH
 | 
 | 
Total pressure in cell I.
 | 

 | 
PRNV
 | 
 | 
Sodium vapor pressure which can be:

10-2 which indicates that the sodium vapor pressure is being suppressed due to a sodium liquid-phase pressure.

Sodium saturation pressure if liquid is still present in cell I (i.e., THNL greater than zero - see output item 14).

Gas pressure of superheated sodium vapor if no liquid sodium is left in channel cell I (i.e. if THNL is equal to zero - see output time 13).

 | 

 | 
PRFI
 | 
 | 
Free fission-gas pressure. This pressure component is equal to the total pressure for a sodium single-liquid-phase pressure situation.
 | 

 | 
PFFV
 | 
 | 
Fuel vapor pressure.
 | 

 | 
THCHOP
 | 
 | 
Open channel cross-sectional area per subassembly divided by reference area AXMS which is input. The open channel cross-sectional area is the total channel cross-section area minus the cross-sectional area of the frozen fuel crusts. THCHOP can also be interpreted as the open channel volume fraction.
 | 

 | 
THNAFM
 | 
 | 
Liquid sodium film cross-sectional area per subassembly divided by the input reference area AXMX.
 | 

 | 
THNL
 | 
 | 
Total liquid sodium cross-sectional area per subassembly divided by the input reference area AXMX.
 | 

 | 
Output item 14 contains the other area fractions and also the total component masses per axial cell I:
 | 
 | | 

 | 
I
 | 
 | 
Axial channel index.
 | 

 | 
IFLAG
 | 
 | 
Indicates the type of fuel flow regime present in cell I. IFLAG = 1 indicates the particulate flow regime, IFLAG = 3 indicates partial or full annular fuel flow, and IFLAG = 4 indicates bubbly fuel flow;
 | 

 | 
THFUCH
 | 
 | 
Mobile channel fuel cross-sectional area per subassembly divided by the input reference area AXMX.
 | 

 | 
THFF
 | 
 | 
Stationary fuel crust cross-sectional area per subassembly divided by the input reference area AXMX.
 | 

 | 
THVG
 | 
 | 
Cross-sectional area of the vapor/gas flow per subassembly divided by input reference area AXMX.
 | 

 | 
FUMASS
 | 
 | 
Mobile channel fuel mass in channel cell I (a channel cell in PLUTO2 includes all subchannels of a subassembly).
 | 

 | 
FUFFMA
 | 
 | 
Stationary frozen film mass in channel cell I.
 | 

 | 
NAMASS
 | 
 | 
Total sodium mass in channel cell I.
 | 

 | 
FIMASS
 | 
 | 
Total free fission-gas mass in channel cell I.
 | 

 | 
FIDGMA
 | 
 | 
Mass of fission gas dissolved in the mobile fuel in channel cell I.
 | 

 | 
FIFFMA
 | 
 | 
Mass of fission gas dissolved in the frozen fuel crusts in channel cell I.
 | 

 | 
Output item 15 contains the variable columns giving channel, cladding, and structure temperatures in cell I:
 | 
 | | 

 | 
I
 | 
 | 
Axial channel index.
 | 

 | 
IDISR
 | 
 | 
Gives information about cladding disruption and fuel and gas ejection: If IDISR = 0, cladding is not ruptured; if IDISR = 2, cladding is ruptured but currently no ejection going on; if IDISR = 3, cladding is ruptured and fuel and gas ejection are going on; IDISR also appears in output item 5.
 | 

 | 
TENA
 | 
 | 
Sodium temperature.
 | 

 | 
TEFUOS
 | 
 | 
Fuel temperature. The fuel temperature will be in the melting range if TFSOL < TEFUOS < TFLIQ (TFSIK and TFLIQ ARE INPUT). The fuel melt fraction in this case is: (TEFUOS - TFSOL)/(TFLIQ - TFSOL);
 | 

 | 
TEFFCL
 | 
 | 
Temperature of the frozen fuel crust on the cladding.
 | 

 | 
TEFFSR
 | 
 | 
Temperature of the frozen fuel crust on the structure.
 | 

 | 
TECLOS
 | 
 | 
Temperature of the cladding outer surface. The outer cladding temperature will be in the melting range if TESOL < TECLOS < TELIQ (TESOL and TELIQ are input). The cladding melt fraction in this case is: (TECLOS - TESOL)/(TELIQ - TESOL);
 | 

 | 
TECLIN
 | 
 | 
Temperature of the middle cladding node.
 | 

 | 
TESROS
 | 
 | 
Temperature of the structure surface facing the coolant channel.
 | 

 | 
TESRIN
 | 
 | 
Temperature of the structure node facing the neighboring subassembly.
 | 

 | 
Output items 16 and 17 show the pin and total fuel masses for the entire axial region containing fuel. The fuel-pin masses outside the interaction region were not shown before. The following variables are displayed:
 | 
 | | 

 | 
MAFUPI
 | 
 | 
Total mass in all fuel-pin cells corresponding to channel cell I (including the stationary fuel in both the failed and unfailed pin nodes and the mobile fuel in the failed pin nodes).
 | 

 | 
MAFUTO
 | 
 | 
Sum of the total fuel in channel cell I and MAFUPI (see above). This output is valuable for comparing with one-dimensional hodoscope fuel distribution curves.
 | 

 | 
Output item 18 contains the variable columns pertaining to the temperature distribution along the entire channel including the regions outside the interaction region: It should be noted that the temperatures outside the interaction region which are shown here are calculated at the end of the last heat-transfer time step which can be fractions of a millisecond before the time of the current printout.
 | 
 | | 

 | 
I
 | 
 | 
Axial channel index.
 | 

 | 
ZCOOL
 | 
 | 
Location of the lower boundary of mesh cell I.
 | 

 | 
TREFL2(2)
 | 
 | 
Inner reflector node temperature. Reflectors can be located only below or above the pin zone K2PIN.
 | 

 | 
TREFL2(1)
 | 
 | 
Temperature of the outer reflector node which is facing the coolant.
 | 

 | 
T1(NEPP)
 | 
 | 
Inner cladding surface temperature (i.e., next to the fuel).
 | 

 | 
T1(NE)
 | 
 | 
Cladding temperature of the middle cladding node.
 | 

 | 
T1(NEP)
 | 
 | 
Outer cladding surface temperature (i.e., next to the coolant).
 | 

 | 
TENA
 | 
 | 
Sodium temperature.
 | 

 | 
TSAT
 | 
 | 
Sodium saturation temperature. This is calculated only for the pin zone to detect sodium-boiling initiation.
 | 

 | 
TSTR2(1)
 | 
 | 
Temperature of the structure node facing the coolant channel.
 | 

 | 
TSTR2(2)
 | 
 | 
Temperature of the structure node facing the neighboring hexcan wall.
 | 

 | 
PRCH
 | 
 | 
Pressure in the coolant channel. This is calculated outside the fuel-pin zone only if the interaction region extends beyond it.
 | 

 | 
Output item 18 shows the message “PLUTO ENDS”. This indicates that control is transferred from PLUTO2 to the SAS4A transient driver TSTHRM at the end of a primary-loop time step. The variables printed after the message “PLUTO ENDS” are not labeled in order to save space in multi-channel runs. These variables are:
 | 
 | | 

 | 
ICYCLE
 | 
 | 
PLUTO2 calculational cycle.
 | 

 | 
IFMIBT
 | 
 | 
Lowermost interaction zone cell.
 | 

 | 
IFMITP
 | 
 | 
Uppermost interaction zone cell.
 | 

 | 
IFRIBT
 | 
 | 
Lowermost channel cell with failed cladding.
 | 

 | 
IFRITP
 | 
 | 
Uppermost cladding cell with failed cladding.
 | 

 | 
IFFUBT
 | 
 | 
Lowermost channel cell containing fuel.
 | 

 | 
IFFUTP
 | 
 | 
Uppermost channel cell containing fuel.
 | 

 | 
ICH
 | 
 | 
SAS4A calculational channel.
 | 

 | 
REA1
 | 
 | 
Sodium voiding reactivity for channel ICH.
 | 

 | 
REA2
 | 
 | 
Fuel reactivity for channel ICH.
 | 

 | 
TIMEPL
 | 
 | 
PLUTO2 time for channel which is counted from the time of pin failure.
 | 

The above 11 variables of output item 18 are also printed with the
message “PLUTO STARTS”, in the same order, at the time of entry to the
PLUTO2 module, before printing output item 1.

Figure 14.8.1 Sample Output from PLUTO2 Module showing the Various Items of Output Described in Section 14.8.2

Figure 14.8.2 Sample Output from PLUTO2 Module showing the Various Items of Output Described in Section 14.8.2 (Cont’d)

Figure 14.8.3 Sample Output from PLUTO2 Module showing the Various Items of Output Described in Section 14.8.2 (Cont’d)

Figure 14.8.4 Sample Output from PLUTO2 Module showing the Various Items of Output Described in Section 14.8.2 (Cont’d)


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[page: Part04/Ch14/references.html]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[anchor: references]

# 14.9. References

14-1. L. L. Smith, et al., Unpublished information, Argonne National
Laboratory, 1975.

14-2. W. R. Bohl, Unpublished information, Argonne National Laboratory,
1974.

14-3. H. U. Wider, “An Improved Analysis of Fuel Motion During an
Overpower Excursion,” Ph.D. Thesis, Northwestern University, Evanston,
Illinois, June 1974.

14-4. H. U. Wider, et al., “An Improved Analysis of Fuel Motion During
an Overpower Excursion,” Fast Reactor Safety, CONF-740401-P3, Beverly
Hills, California, p. 1541, April 1974.

14-5. A. B. Rothman, et al., “Results of Recent TOP and LOF Experiments
in TREAT,” Proc. Int. Melting on Fast Reactor Safety and Related
Physics, Chicago, Illinois, CONF-761001, p. 1625, October 1976.

14-6. H. U. Wider and L. A. Semenza, “Analysis of TREAT Transient
Overpower Experiments Using the PLUTO Codes,” Specialists Workshop on
Predictive Analysis of Material Dynamics in LMFBR Safety Experiments,
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory Report, March 1979.

14-7. P. A. Pizzica and P. B. Abramson, “A Numerical Model of Reactor
Fuel and Coolant Motions Following Pin Failure,” Nucl. Sci. Eng., vol.
64, p. 465-479, 1977.

14-8. P. A. Pizzica, P. L. Garner, and P. B. Abramson, “A User’s Guide
to EPIC, a Computer Program to Calculate the Motion of Fuel and Coolant
Subsequent to Pin Failure in an LMFBR,” ANL-80-47, Argonne National
Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois, October 1979.

14-9. D. H. Cho, R. O. Ivins, and R. W. Wright, “Pressure Generation by
Molten Fuel-Coolant Interactions Under LMFBR Accident Conditions,”
Proc. Conf. on New Developments in Reactor Mathematics and
Applications, Idaho Falls, March 1971.

14-10. D. P. Weber and H. U. Wider Eds., Unpublished information,
Argonne National Laboratory, 1977.

14-11. H. U. Wider, “PLUTO2: A Computer Code for the Analysis of
Overpower Accidents in LMFBRs,” Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc., vol. 27, p.
533, November 1977.

14-12. H. U. Wider, A. M. Tentner, and P. A. Pizzica, “The PLUTO2
Overpower Excursion Code and a Comparison with EPIC,” Fast Reactor
Safety Meeting, Seattle, Washington, vol. 1, p. 120, August 1979.

14-13. R. J. Page, et al., Unpublished information, Argonne National
Laboratory, 1978.

14-14. R. O. McNary, et al., Unpublished information, Argonne National
Laboratory, 1979.

14-15. C. H. Bowers, H. U. Wider, and A. M. Tentner, “Analysis of TREAT
Transient Tests L7 and L8 with SAS3D, LEVITATE, and PLUTO2,” Specialists
Workshop on Predictive Analysis of Material Dynamics in LMFBR Safety
Experiments, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, March 1979.

14-16. A. M. Tentner, H. U. Wider, and C. H. Bowers, “A Mechanistic
Model of Fuel Flow Regimes and Fuel Plateout in LMFBR Overpower
Accidents,” Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc., vol. 30, p. 448, November 1978.

14-17. A. E. Wright, et al., Unpublished information, Argonne National
Laboratory, 1978.

14-18. J, K. Bigelow, G. E. Russher, and S. E. Seeman, Unpublished
information, Hanford Engineering Development Laboratory, 1980.

14-19. W. A. Ragland, et al., Unpublished information, Argonne National
Laboratory, 1981.

14-20. P. C. Cacciabue, et al., “Comparative Analysis of a Hypothetical
9.1 $/sec Transient Overpower Accident in an Irradiated LMFBR Core Using
Different Computer Models,” EUR 8018 EN, Nuclear Science and Technology,
Commission of the European Community, Luxembourg, 1982.

14-21. Argonne National Laboratory, Unpublished information, 1975.

14-22. R. B. Bird, W. E. Stewart, and E. N. Lightfoot, Transient
Phenomena, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1960.

14-23. R. G. Deissler, “Analysis of Turbulent Heat Transfer, Mass
Transfer, and Friction in Smooth Tubes at High Prandtl an Schmidt
Numbers,” NACA Report 1210, 1955.

14-24. A. E. Wright, et al., “Transient Overpower Test H5 on FFTF-Type
Intermediate-Power Fuel,” Unpublished information, Argonne National
Laboratory, Illinois, June 1975. Also see A. E. Wright, et al., “Inpile
Failure Threshold Experiment (H5) With Pre-Irradiated FFTF-Type Fuel,”
Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc., vol. 18, p. 211, June 1975.

14-25. R. J. Page A. B. Rothman, and P. H. Froehle, Unpublished
information, Argonne National Laboratory, 1979.

14-26. W. L. Hu, Unpublished information, Hanford Engineering
Development Laboratory, 1983.

14-27. H. U. Wider, J. f. Jackson, and D. T. Eggen, “An Improved Viscous
Pressure Formulation for Two-Phase Compressible Hydrodynamics
Calculations,” Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc., vol. 17, p. 246, November 1973.

14-28. R. E. Henry, M. A. Grolmes, and H. K. Fauske, “Pressure Pulse
Propagation in Two-Phase One- and Two-Component Mixtures,” ANL-7792,
Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois, March 1971.

14-29. L. L. Smith, Unpublished information, Los Alamos Scientific
Laboratory, 1980.

14-30. J. H. Stuhmiller and R. E. Ferguson, “Comparison of Numerical
Methods for Fluid Flows,” EPRI NP-1236, Electric Power Research
Institute, Palo Alto, California, November 1979.

14-31. Patrick J. Roache, Computational Fluid Dynamics, Hermosa
Publishers, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 1976.

14-32. H. U. Wider, J. F. Jackson, and W. R. Bohl, “The Slip Flow
Treatment in the PLUTO Code,” Proc. Conf. on Computational Methods in
Nuclear Engineering, Charleston, South Carolina, CONF-760413, Vol. 1,
pp. II-125 to II-144, April 1975.

14-33. M. Ishii and M. A. Grolmes, “Inception Criteria for Droplet
Entrainment in Two-Phase Concurrent Film Flow,” AICHE J., vol. 21, no.
2, p. 308-317, March 1975.

14-34. M. Ishii and M. A. Grolmes, Unpublished information, Argonne
National Laboratory, 1974.

14-35. R. N. Knoopman, et al., Unpublished information, Argonne National
Laboratory, 1977.

14-36. A. E. Wright, et al., Unpublished information, Argonne National
Laboratory, 1976.

14-37. H. U. Wider and A. E. Wright, “Analysis of a Sodium Reentry Event
in the H4 TREAT Tests,” Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc., vol. 22, p. 428,
November 1975.

14-38. B. W. Spencer, et al., “Fuel Motion in the CAMEL TOP-Simulation
LMFBR Safety Tests,” Proc. Intl. Meeting on Fast Reactor Safety,
Seattle, Washington, vol. 4, p. 1756-1765, August 1979.

14-39. Argonne National Laboratory, Unpublished information, 1980.

14-40. S. J. Board and R. W. Hall, “Recent Advances in Understanding
Large Scale Vapor Explosions,” Proc. Third Specialist Meeting on
Sodium/Fuel Interaction in Fast Reactors, Tokyo, Power Reactor and
Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation Report PNC N251 65-12, vol. 1, pp.
249-284, March 1976.

14-41. H. Jacobs, “Computational Analysis of Fuel-Sodium Interaction
With an Improved Method,” Proc. Int. Meeting on Fast Reactor Safety and
Related Physics, Chicago, CONF-761001, pp. 926-935, October 1976.

14-42. W. A. Ragland, et al., “Interpretation of SLSF Experiment P4
Instrument Response,” Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc., vol. 44, p. 332-333, June
1983.

14-43. Argonne National Laboratory, Unpublished information, 1978.

14-44. S. J. Hakim, Unpublished information, Los Alamos Scientific
Laboratory, 1979.

14-45. M. Epstein and G. M. Hauser, “The Melting of Finite Steel Slabs
in Flowing Nuclear Reactor Fuel,” Nucl. Eng. Des., vol. 52, p.
411-428, 1979.

14-46. J. J. Sienicki and B. W. Spencer, Unpublished information,
Argonne National Laboratory, 1981.

14-47. M. W. Maresca and O. E. Dwyer, “Heat Transfer to Mercury Flowing
In-line Through a Bundle of Circular Rods,” Trans. ASME, J. Heat
Transfer, vol. 86, p. 180-186, May 1964.

14-48. John G. Collier, Convective Boiling and Condensation,
2nd. Ed., McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, p. 33, 1981.

14-49. G. B. Wallis, One-Dimensional Two-Phase Flow, McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York, 1969.

14-50. M. M. El-Wakil, Nuclear Power Engineering, McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York, 1962.

14-51. Kalimullah and H. U. Wider, Unpublished information, Argonne
National Laboratory, 1983.

14-52. G. L. Bordner, et al., Unpublished information, Argonne National
Laboratory, 1978.

14-53. A. K. Fisher, et al., “Fuel Dynamics Loss-of-Flow Test L3,”
ANL-76-79, Argonne National Laboratory, Illinois, June 1976.

14-54. J. G. Eberhart, et al., Unpublished information, Argonne National
Laboratory, 1976.

14-55. Argonne National Laboratory, Unpublished information, 1980.

14-56. R. Courant and K. O. Friedrichs, Supersonic Flow and Shock
Waves, Interscience Publishers, Inc., New York, 1948.

14-57. Argonne National Laboratory, Unpublished information, Argonne
National Laboratory, 1977.

14-58. M. Ishii, Argonne National Laboratory, personal communication,
1980.

14-59. Argonne National Laboratory, Unpublished information, Argonne
National Laboratory, 1976.

14-60. J. K. Fink, M. G. Chasanov, and L. Leibowitz, Unpublished
information, Argonne National Laboratory, 1982.

14-61. G. H. Golden and J. V. Tokar, “Thermophysical Properties of
Sodium,” ANL-7323, Argonne National Laboratory, Illinois, August 1967.

14-62. J. O. Hirschfelder, C. F. Curtiss, and R. B. Bird, Molecular
Theory of Gases and Liquids, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1954.

14-63. Kalimullah and A. M. Tentner, Unpublished information, Argonne
National Laboratory, 1984.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[page: Part04/Ch14/nomenclature.html]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[anchor: nomenclature]

# 14.10. Nomenclature

 | 

 | 
Symbol
 | 
 | 
Definition
 | 
 | 
Units
 | 

 | 

 | 
 $l$ 
 | 
 | 
Linear
 | 
 | | 

 | 
n
 | 
 | 
Time step n
 | 
 | | 

 | 
‘
 | 
 | 
Prime always indicates that a quantity refers to a unit of generalized smear volume
 | 
 | | 

 | 
Subscripts
 | 
 | | 
 | | 

 | 
ac
 | 
 | 
Acoustic
 | 
 | | 

 | 
an
 | 
 | 
Annular
 | 
 | | 

 | 
bb
 | 
 | 
Bubbly or bubble
 | 
 | | 

 | 
bk
 | 
 | 
Lower boundary of node K
 | 
 | | 

 | 
ca
 | 
 | 
Cavity
 | 
 | | 

 | 
ch
 | 
 | 
Coolant channel
 | 
 | | 

 | 
cl
 | 
 | 
Cladding
 | 
 | | 

 | 
co
 | 
 | 
Condensation
 | 
 | | 

 | 
deet
 | 
 | 
De-entrainment
 | 
 | | 

 | 
drag
 | 
 | 
Drag
 | 
 | | 

 | 
ej
 | 
 | 
Ejected or ejection
 | 
 | | 

 | 
et
 | 
 | 
Entrained or entrainment
 | 
 | | 

 | 
fc
 | 
 | 
Fuel/clad interface
 | 
 | | 

 | 
ff
 | 
 | 
Frozen fuel
 | 
 | | 

 | 
ffcl
 | 
 | 
Frozen fuel on cladding
 | 
 | | 

 | 
ffsr
 | 
 | 
Frozen fuel on structure
 | 
 | | 

 | 
fi
 | 
 | 
Free fission gas in coolant channel
 | 
 | | 

 | 
fica
 | 
 | 
Free fission gas in molten pin cavity
 | 
 | | 

 | 
ficaxx
 | 
 | 
Used for special fission gas volume fraction calculation (see Eq. (14.2-46))
 | 
 | | 

 | 
fm
 | 
 | 
Film (stationary liquid sodium film or moving annular fuel film)
 | 
 | | 

 | 
fr
 | 
 | 
Friction
 | 
 | | 

 | 
friction
 | 
 | 
Friction
 | 
 | | 

 | 
FR1
 | 
 | 
Flow regime 1 - particulate fuel flow
 | 
 | | 

 | 
FR3
 | 
 | 
Flow regime 3 - partially or fully annular flow
 | 
 | | 

 | 
FR4
 | 
 | 
Flow regime 4 - bubbly fuel flow
 | 
 | | 

 | 
fsca
 | 
 | 
Dissolved fission gas in the molten pin cavity
 | 
 | | 

 | 
fs
 | 
 | 
Dissolved fission gas in the coolant channel
 | 
 | | 

 | 
fu
 | 
 | 
Liquid and/or mobile solid fuel in the coolant channel
 | 
 | | 

 | 
fuca
 | 
 | 
Mobile fuel in the molten pin cavity
 | 
 | | 

 | 
fuch
 | 
 | 
Mobile fuel in the coolant channel (including fuel vapor)
 | 
 | | 

 | 
fufi
 | 
 | 
Fuel and fission gas
 | 
 | | 

 | 
fv
 | 
 | 
Fuel vapor in the coolant channel
 | 
 | | 

 | 
fvca
 | 
 | 
Fuel vapor in the molten pin cavity
 | 
 | | 

 | 
fz
 | 
 | 
Freezing, frozen
 | 
 | | 

 | 
hoop
 | 
 | 
Hoop (stress)
 | 
 | | 

 | 
Ht
 | 
 | 
Heat transfer
 | 
 | | 

 | 
i
 | 
 | 
Axial coolant channel index, specific enthalpy
 | 
 | | 

 | 
IB
 | 
 | 
Uppermost slug segment of lower sodium slug
 | 
 | | 

 | 
if
 | 
 | 
Interface
 | 
 | | 

 | 
in
 | 
 | 
Inner (middle) clad node or structural node facing neighboring

hexan wall

 | 
 | | 

 | 
inlet
 | 
 | 
Subassembly inlet
 | 
 | | 

 | 
IT
 | 
 | 
Lowermost slug segment of upper sodium slug
 | 
 | | 

 | 
K
 | 
 | 
Axial pin or cavity index
 | 
 | | 

 | 
k
 | 
 | 
Material component k; this can also be cladding or structure
 | 
 | | 

 | 
l
 | 
 | 
Dummy index
 | 
 | | 

 | 
liq
 | 
 | 
Liquidus
 | 
 | | 

 | 
ls
 | 
 | 
Lower slug
 | 
 | | 

 | 
m
 | 
 | 
m = 1 indicates upward flow, m = 2 downward flow
 | 
 | | 

 | 
me
 | 
 | 
Melting, melt-in
 | 
 | | 

 | 
mi
 | 
 | 
Mixture of sodium and fission gas
 | 
 | | 

 | 
min
 | 
 | 
Minimum
 | 
 | | 

 | 
mv
 | 
 | 
Moving
 | 
 | | 

 | 
mx
 | 
 | 
Maximum
 | 
 | | 

 | 
Na
 | 
 | 
Sodium
 | 
 | | 

 | 
Nl
 | 
 | 
Liquid sodium
 | 
 | | 

 | 
Nm
 | 
 | 
Moving sodium liquid and sodium vapor
 | 
 | | 

 | 
node
 | 
 | 
Node
 | 
 | | 

 | 
Nv
 | 
 | 
Sodium vapor
 | 
 | | 

 | 
op
 | 
 | 
Open channel - channel volume or cross section remaining

open after plateout has occurred

 | 
 | | 

 | 
or
 | 
 | 
Orifice
 | 
 | | 

 | 
os
 | 
 | 
Outer surface of clad or structure of fuel film or fuel crust.

All these surfaces are facing the coolant channel.

 | 
 | | 

 | 
outlet
 | 
 | 
Subassembly outlet
 | 
 | | 

 | 
p
 | 
 | 
Subscript of specific heat for constant pressure
 | 
 | | 

 | 
Pa
 | 
 | 
Fuel particle
 | 
 | | 

 | 
pin,pi
 | 
 | 
Pin
 | 
 | | 

 | 
PL
 | 
 | 
PLUTO2
 | 
 | | 

 | 
power
 | 
 | 
Power
 | 
 | | 

 | 
radial
 | 
 | 
Radial
 | 
 | | 

 | 
rl
 | 
 | 
Dissolved fission-gas release
 | 
 | | 

 | 
S’
 | 
 | 
Sink or source per unit of generalized smear volume
 | 
 | | 

 | 
sol
 | 
 | 
Solidus
 | 
 | | 

 | 
sonic
 | 
 | 
Sonic
 | 
 | | 

 | 
sr
 | 
 | 
Structure
 | 
 | | 

 | 
un
 | 
 | 
Uncompressed
 | 
 | | 

 | 
us
 | 
 | 
Upper liquid sodium slug
 | 
 | | 

 | 
UTS
 | 
 | 
Ultimate tensile strength
 | 
 | | 

 | 
vg
 | 
 | 
Vapor and gas
 | 
 | | 

 | 
vi
 | 
 | 
Viscous
 | 
 | | 

 | 
x
 | 
 | 
Auxiliary subscript
 | 
 | | 

 | 
z
 | 
 | 
Axial location z
 | 
 | | 

 | 
zi
 | 
 | 
Designates bottom of a liquid sodium slug segment
 | 
 | | 

 | 
Greek Symbols
 | 
 | 
Definition
 | 
 | 
Units
 | 

 | 
 $\alpha$ 
 | 
 | 
Void fraction
 | 
 | | 

 | 
 $\beta$ 
 | 
 | 
Delayed neutron fraction
 | 
 | | 

 | 
 $\gamma$ 
 | 
 | 
Cp/Cv
 | 
 | | 

 | 
 $\delta$ 
 | 
 | 
Partial derivative
 | 
 | | 

 | 
 $\Delta$ 
 | 
 | 
Derivative in finite differences
 | 
 | | 

 | 
 $\kappa$ 
 | 
 | 
Compressibility
 | 
 | | 

 | 
 $\pi$ 
 | 
 | 
Circumference of a circle divided by its diameter
 | 
 | | 

 | 
 $\rho$ 
 | 
 | 
Theoretical density
 | 
 | | 

 | 
 $\rho'$ 
 | 
 | 
Generalize linear density
 | 
 | | 

 | 
 $\sigma$ 
 | 
 | 
Surface tension
 | 
 | | 

 | 
 $\theta$ 
 | 
 | 
Generalized volume fraction
 | 
 | | 

 | 
Regular Symbols
 | 
 | 
Description
 | 
 | 
Units
 | 

 | 
A
 | 
 | 
Cross section area
 | 
 | | 

 | 
A’
 | 
 | 
Interaction or surface area per unit of generalized smear volume
 | 
 | | 

 | 
AFR
 | 
 | 
Input, liquid sodium friction coefficient
 | 
 | | 

 | 
AFRV
 | 
 | 
Input, sodium vapor friction coefficient
 | 
 | | 

 | 
AHELP
 | 
 | 
Auxiliary quantity in momentum conservation
 | 
 | | 

 | 
AMIIN
 | 
 | 
Auxiliary quantity in momentum conservation
 | 
 | | 

 | 
ARCH
 | 
 | 
Cross section area of coolant channel per pin
 | 
 | | 

 | 
ARCL
 | 
 | 
Cladding surface area per unit of generalized smear

volume

 | 
 | | 

 | 
AREA
 | 
 | 
Area
 | 
 | | 

 | 
ARFF
 | 
 | 
Cross section area of plated-out fuel pin
 | 
 | | 

 | 
ARMF
 | 
 | 
Cross section area of moving fuel per pin
 | 
 | | 

 | 
ARSR
 | 
 | 
Structure surface area per unit of generalized smear

volume

 | 
 | | 

 | 
AXMX
 | 
 | 
Input, reference cross section area; recommended input

value is subassembly cross section area

 | 
 | | 

 | 
BFR
 | 
 | 
Input, exponent of liquid friction coefficient
 | 
 | | 

 | 
BFRV
 | 
 | 
Input, exponent of vapor friction coefficient
 | 
 | | 

 | 
BHELP
 | 
 | 
Auxiliary quantity in the momentum equation
 | 
 | | 

 | 
BMIIN
 | 
 | 
Auxiliary quantity in the momentum equation
 | 
 | | 

 | 
C
 | 
 | 
Specific heat
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CDFU
 | 
 | 
Input, fuel conductivity
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CDNL
 | 
 | 
Input, liquid sodium conductivity
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CDVG
 | 
 | 
Input, conductivity of sodium vapor
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CFCOFV
 | 
 | 
Input, fuel vapor condensation coefficient
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CFFFCL
 | 
 | 
Fraction of channel perimeter covered by plated-out fuel
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CFFRMF
 | 
 | 
Friction coefficient for annular fuel
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CFFUCL
 | 
 | 
Fraction of cladding and structure covered by moving or plated-out fuel
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CFMELT
 | 
 | 
Fraction of frozen fuel remelting per PLUTO2 time step
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CFMFCL
 | 
 | 
Fraction of channel perimeter covered by moving fuel
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CFMFFF
 | 
 | 
Fraction of plated-out fuel covered by moving fuel
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CFNACL
 | 
 | 
Fraction of channel perimeter that is in contact with sodium
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CFNACN
 | 
 | 
Input, sodium vapor condensation coefficient
 | 
 | 
J/(m2·s·K)
 | 

 | 
CFNAEV
 | 
 | 
Input, sodium evaporation coefficient
 | 
 | 
J/(m2·s·K)
 | 

 | 
CIANIN
 | 
 | 
Input, determines when a complete annular fuel flow begins
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CIA1
 | 
 | 
Input, constant in the fuel particle-to-sodium heat transfer
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CIA2
 | 
 | 
Input, constant in the fuel particle-to-sodium heat transfer
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CIA3
 | 
 | 
Input, constant in the Deissler heat-transfer correlation
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CIA4
 | 
 | 
Input, controls range of interpolation between boiling

heat transfer coefficient and single-phase gas heat-transfer

coefficient

 | 
 | | 

 | 
CIA5
 | 
 | 
Input, controls drag dependence in void fraction in the

particulate flow regime

 | 
 | | 

 | 
CIA6
 | 
 | 
Input, controls drag in the bubbly flow regime
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CIBBIN
 | 
 | 
Input, controlling onset of bubbly flow regime
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CIETFU
 | 
 | 
Input, controls effect of fuel particles on sodium film entrainment
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CIFRFU
 | 
 | 
Input, part of the fuel friction calculation
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CIFUFZ
 | 
 | 
Input, controls mode of fuel freezing
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CIFUMO
 | 
 | 
Input, controls axial fuel momentum low on ejection from pin
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CINAFO
 | 
 | 
Input, initial and maximum sodium film fraction
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CIREFU
 | 
 | 
Input, Reynolds number above which fully turbulent fuel flow is assumed for friction calculation
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CIRTFS
 | 
 | 
Input, controls dissolved gas release
 | 
 | 
1/s
 | 

 | 
CIVOID
 | 
 | 
Input, controls liquid sodium fraction below which single-phase heat-transfer and friction laws are used
 | 
 | | 

 | 
CMFU
 | 
 | 
Input, liquid fuel compressibility
 | 
 | 
1/Pa
 | 

 | 
CMNL
 | 
 | 
Input, liquid sodium compressibility
 | 
 | 
1/Pa
 | 

 | 
COFICH
 | 
 | 
Convective fission-gas mass flux in coolant channel
 | 
 | 
kg/(s·m2)
 | 

 | 
COFUCH
 | 
 | 
Convective fuel mass flux in coolant channel
 | 
 | 
kg/(s·m2)
 | 

 | 
COFUOS
 | 
 | 
Convective fuel energy flux in the channel
 | 
 | 
J/(s·m2)
 | 

 | 
CONACH
 | 
 | 
Convective sodium mass flux in coolant channel
 | 
 | 
kg/(s·m2)
 | 

 | 
CPFU
 | 
 | 
Input, fuel heat capacity
 | 
 | 
J/(s·m2)
 | 

 | 
CTFRFU
 | 
 | 
Fraction of the moving fuel that is in contact with clad or plated-out fuel
 | 
 | | 

 | 
C1
 | 
 | 
Input, part of liquid sodium heat-transfer correlation
 | 
 | | 

 | 
C2
 | 
 | 
Input, part of liquid sodium heat-transfer correlation
 | 
 | | 

 | 
C3
 | 
 | 
Input, part of liquid sodium heat-transfer correlation
 | 
 | | 

 | 
C1VIPR
 | 
 | 
Input, used for the artificial viscous pressure calculation in the pin
 | 
 | | 

 | 
C2VIPR
 | 
 | 
Input, used for the artificial viscous pressure calculation in the pin
 | 
 | | 

 | 
D
 | 
 | 
Diameter, hydraulic diameter
 | 
 | 
m
 | 

 | 
DEFICH
 | 
 | 
Generalized smear density of free fission gas in the coolant channel
 | 
 | 
kg/m3
 | 

 | 
DEFUCH
 | 
 | 
Generalized smear density of the moving fuel in the coolant channel
 | 
 | 
kg/m3
 | 

 | 
DEFVCH
 | 
 | 
Generalized smear density of fuel vapor in the coolant channel
 | 
 | 
kg/m3
 | 

 | 
DENACH
 | 
 | 
Generalized smear density of sodium in the coolant channel
 | 
 | 
kg/m3
 | 

 | 
DENMCH
 | 
 | 
Generalized smear density of moving sodium in the coolant channel
 | 
 | 
kg/m3
 | 

 | 
DZPLIN
 | 
 | 
Input, minimum length of a Lagrangian edge cell
 | 
 | 
m
 | 

 | 
e
 | 
 | 
Internal energy
 | 
 | 
J/kg
 | 

 | 
EGBBLY
 | 
 | 
Input, internal fuel energy below which fuel freezing begins
 | 
 | 
J/kg
 | 

 | 
EGFULQ
 | 
 | 
Input, internal fuel energy at the solidus
 | 
 | 
J/kg
 | 

 | 
EGFUSO
 | 
 | 
Input, internal fuel energy at the solidus
 | 
 | 
J/kg
 | 

 | 
EGMN
 | 
 | 
Input, internal fuel energy below which fuel cannot switch

from the particulate to a continuous flow regime

 | 
 | 
J/kg
 | 

 | 
EPCH
 | 
 | 
Input, controls use of advanced pressure in in-pin calculation
 | 
 | | 

 | 
f
 | 
 | 
Factor used in interphase drag term
 | 
 | | 

 | 
F
 | 
 | 
Friction factor
 | 
 | | 

 | 
FF
 | 
 | 
Mass of fuel ejected per time step and per unit of generalized

smear volume

 | 
 | 
kg/m2
 | 

 | 
FIFNGB
 | 
 | 
Input, fraction of fission gas on grain boundaries which becomes available as free gas upon fuel melting
 | 
 | | 

 | 
FNARME
 | 
 | 
Input, cross section area of pin cavity/cross section area of fuel

above which failure of this node is allowed to occur

 | 
 | | 

 | 
FNFUAN
 | 
 | 
Input, controls when annular fuel flow in molten pin cavity is

assumed

 | 
 | | 

 | 
FNMECA
 | 
 | 
Fraction of node width of radial heat-transfer node on cavity boundaries which melts in pure PLUTO2 time step
 | 
 | | 

 | 
FNMELT
 | 
 | 
Input, controls locus of cavity boundary
 | 
 | | 

 | 
FNPI
 | 
 | 
Fraction of all the pins in a subassembly which have failed
 | 
 | | 

 | 
FNPOHE
 | 
 | 
Relative power level
 | 
 | | 

 | 
FN
 | 
 | 
Fraction of the molten fuel in a ejection cell which is ejected

per PLUTO2 time step

 | 
 | | 

 | 
FUELMS
 | 
 | 
Initial fuel mass in a radial fuel-pin mode
 | 
 | 
kg
 | 

 | 
FUMASS
 | 
 | 
Initial total fuel mass in an axial fuel node
 | 
 | 
kg
 | 

 | 
FUMS
 | 
 | 
Current fuel mass in the radial fuel pin node on the cavity

boundary

 | 
 | 
kg
 | 

 | 
F.R. 1
 | 
 | 
Particulate fuel flow regime
 | 
 | | 

 | 
F.R. 3
 | 
 | 
Partially or fully annular flow regime
 | 
 | | 

 | 
F.R. 4
 | 
 | 
Bubbly fuel flow regime
 | 
 | | 

 | 
g
 | 
 | 
Gravity
 | 
 | 
m/s2
 | 

 | 
GAMSS
 | 
 | 
Input, fraction of power going into direct heating of structure
 | 
 | | 

 | 
GAMTNC
 | 
 | 
Input, fraction of power going into direct heating of coolant
 | 
 | | 

 | 
GAMTNE
 | 
 | 
Input, fraction of power going into direct heating of cladding
 | 
 | | 

 | 
h
 | 
 | 
Heat-transfer coefficient
 | 
 | 
J/(m2·s·K)
 | 

 | 
H
 | 
 | 
Heat-transfer coefficient times heat-transfer area
 | 
 | 
J/(s·K)
 | 

 | 
HCCLMI
 | 
 | 
Input, heat-transfer coefficient between hot cladding and a

two-phase sodium/gas mixture

 | 
 | 
J/(m2·s·K)
 | 

 | 
HCFFMI
 | 
 | 
Input, heat-transfer coefficient between frozen fuel crust surface and two-phase sodium/gas mixture
 | 
 | 
J/(m2·s·K)
 | 

 | 
HCFUBB
 | 
 | 
Input, heat-transfer coefficient between the interior of the molten fuel and bubble surface
 | 
 | 
J/(m2·s·K)
 | 

 | 
h1
 | 
 | 
Auxiliary heat-transfer coefficient
 | 
 | 
J/(m2·s·K)
 | 

 | 
h2
 | 
 | 
Auxiliary heat-transfer coefficients
 | 
 | 
J/(m2·s·K)
 | 

 | 
I
 | 
 | 
Axial node index in coolant channel
 | 
 | | 

 | 
IB
 | 
 | 
Channel zone in which the uppermost segment of the lower

slug is located

 | 
 | | 

 | 
IDIFF
 | 
 | 
Offset between pin and channel grid. The first pin node is

at the same elevation as channel node IDIFF + 1

 | 
 | | 

 | 
IFLAG
 | 
 | 
Pointer array which gives the flow regime number for each

axial channel node

 | 
 | | 

 | 
IMAX
 | 
 | 
Uppermost slug segment of upper sodium slug
 | 
 | | 

 | 
IT
 | 
 | 
Channel zone in which the lowermost segment of the upper

slug is located

 | 
 | | 

 | 
k
 | 
 | 
Conductivity
 | 
 | 
J/(m·s·K)
 | 

 | 
K
 | 
 | 
Axial index in the pin
 | 
 | | 

 | 
KKMX
 | 
 | 
Uppermost node in the molten pin cavity
 | 
 | | 

 | 
KZPIN
 | 
 | 
Coolant channel zone which contains the fuel pins
 | 
 | | 

 | 
KK1
 | 
 | 
Lowermost node in the molten pin cavity
 | 
 | | 

 | 
L
 | 
 | 
Length
 | 
 | 
m
 | 

 | 
L1
 | 
 | 
Length of the Lagrangian node at one end of the

interaction region

 | 
 | 
m
 | 

 | 
L2
 | 
 | 
Length of Lagrangian node at the other end of

the interaction region

 | 
 | 
m
 | 

 | 
N’
 | 
 | 
Number per unit of generalized smear volume
 | 
 | | 

 | 
NCPLEV
 | 
 | 
Input, number of cladding nodes which have to be molten in to lead to switch to LEVITATE
 | 
 | | 

 | 
NGRDSP
 | 
 | 
Input, number of grid spacers in the channel zone containing fuel pins
 | 
 | | 

 | 
NRPI
 | 
 | 
Number of pins per subassembly
 | 
 | | 

 | 
NT
 | 
 | 
Number of radial fuel pin nodes
 | 
 | | 

 | 
Nu
 | 
 | 
Nusselt number
 | 
 | | 

 | 
P
 | 
 | 
Pressure
 | 
 | 
Pa
 | 

 | 
PECH
 | 
 | 
Perimeter of the coolant channel associated with one pin
 | 
 | 
M
 | 

 | 
PORFR
 | 
 | 
Porosity fraction
 | 
 | | 

 | 
POW
 | 
 | 
Input, power in highest rated axial fuel pin node
 | 
 | 
W
 | 

 | 
POWCOF
 | 
 | 
Exponent in the exponential function which give the power history during main time step
 | 
 | | 

 | 
PRFAIL
 | 
 | 
Input, failure pressure for non-mechanistic clad failure

Propagation

 | 
 | 
Pa
 | 

 | 
Pr
 | 
 | 
Prandtl number
 | 
 | | 

 | 
PSHAPE
 | 
 | 
Input, axial pin power shape
 | 
 | | 

 | 
PSHAPR
 | 
 | 
Input, radial power shape in a pin
 | 
 | | 

 | 
Q
 | 
 | 
Fission heat source
 | 
 | 
W/kg
 | 

 | 
r
 | 
 | 
Radius
 | 
 | 
M
 | 

 | 
R
 | 
 | 
Gas constant or radius
 | 
 | 
J/(kg·K)
 | 

 | 
RAFPLA
 | 
 | 
Input, radius of large particles
 | 
 | 
m
 | 

 | 
RAFPSM
 | 
 | 
Input, radius of small particles (which have been generated due to the decay of the larger particles after TIFP seconds)
 | 
 | 
kg
 | 

 | 
RETFG2
 | 
 | 
Retained fission-gas mass in the original radial fuel-pin node at the cavity boundary before it began melting into the cavity
 | 
 | | 

 | 
Re
 | 
 | 
Reynold’s number
 | 
 | | 

 | 
RGAS
 | 
 | 
Input, gas constant for fission gas
 | 
 | 
J/(kg·K)
 | 

 | 
RGNA
 | 
 | 
Sodium vapor gas constant which is a calculated quantity in

PLUTO2

 | 
 | 
J/(kg·K)
 | 

 | 
S
 | 
 | 
Mass sink or source
 | 
 | 
kg/s
 | 

 | 
S’
 | 
 | 
Mass sink or source per unit of generalized smear volume
 | 
 | 
kg/(s·m3)
 | 

 | 
St
 | 
 | 
Stanton number
 | 
 | | 

 | 
t
 | 
 | 
Time
 | 
 | 
s
 | 

 | 
T
 | 
 | 
Temperature
 | 
 | 
K
 | 

 | 
TECLMN
 | 
 | 
Input, cladding temperature above which frozen fuel will not stick to the cladding
 | 
 | 
K
 | 

 | 
TECLRL
 | 
 | 
Input, cladding temperature above which the frozen fuel crust will be released
 | 
 | 
K
 | 

 | 
TEFAIL
 | 
 | 
Input, cladding failure temperature in nonmechanistic failure criteria
 | 
 | 
K
 | 

 | 
TESOL
 | 
 | 
Input, steel solidus temperature
 | 
 | 
K
 | 

 | 
TIFP
 | 
 | 
Input, time delay for fragmentation of large particles into

small ones

 | 
 | 
s
 | 

 | 
TKFF
 | 
 | 
Thickness of frozen fuel crust
 | 
 | 
m
 | 

 | 
u
 | 
 | 
Velocity
 | 
 | 
m/s
 | 

 | 
UFCH
 | 
 | 
Fuel velocity in the channel
 | 
 | 
m/s
 | 

 | 
UMCH
 | 
 | 
Sodium/gas mixture velocity in the channel
 | 
 | 
m/s
 | 

 | 
VCONST
 | 
 | 
Auxiliary quantity in the sodium film entrainment calculation
 | 
 | | 

 | 
VFNALQ
 | 
 | 
Input, liquid sodium fraction below which a particulate flow regime can become a continuous one
 | 
 | | 

 | 
VFNARE
 | 
 | 
Input, liquid sodium fraction below which a particular flow regime can become a continuous one
 | 
 | | 

 | 
VIFG
 | 
 | 
Input, viscosity of sodium vapor
 | 
 | 
kg/(m·s)
 | 

 | 
VIFULQ
 | 
 | 
Input, viscosity of liquid sodium
 | 
 | 
kg/(m·s)
 | 

 | 
VOLUME
 | 
 | 
Volume
 | 
 | 
m3
 | 

 | 
w
 | 
 | 
Width
 | 
 | 
m
 | 

 | 
W
 | 
 | 
Mass flow rate
 | 
 | 
kg/s
 | 

 | 
x
 | 
 | 
Sodium quality
 | 
 | | 

 | 
XKORGD
 | 
 | 
Input, orifice coefficient of a single grid spacer
 | 
 | | 

 | 
XKORV
 | 
 | 
Input, expansion, contraction, or orifice coefficient
 | 
 | | 

 | 
z
 | 
 | 
Axial coordinate
 | 
 | 
m
 |